Phono-semantic matching

green-yellow : sar ser cer kir kar : black (kala)
https://i.imgur.com/myAP5W8.png

WWW World Wide Web, which is wàn wéi wǎng (万维网), which satisfies "www" and literally means “myriad dimensional net”
hacker has been borrowed into Mandarin as 黑客 (hēikè, "wicked visitor").[8] (black guest)
声纳 shēngnà "sonar", which uses the characters 声 shēng "sound" and 纳 nà "receive, accept"

Chinese has a large number of homo/heterotonal homophonous morphemes, which would have been much better phonetically (but not nearly as good semantically) – consider the syllable song (cf. 送 sòng ‘deliver, carry, give (as a present)’, 松 sōng ‘pine; loose, slack’, 耸 sǒng ‘tower; alarm, attract’ etc.), sou (cf. 搜 sōu ‘search’, 叟 sŏu ‘old man’, 馊 sōu ‘sour, spoiled’ and many others) or shou (cf. 收 shōu ‘receive, accept’, 受 shòu ‘receive, accept’, 手 shǒu ‘hand’, 首 shǒu ‘head’, 兽 shòu ‘beast’, 瘦 shòu ‘thin’ and so forth)."[9]

耸纳 shounà would be ok!

白俄罗斯 Bái'èluósī, "Belarus" combines the word 白 Bái, "White" with the name俄罗斯 Èluósī, "Russia", therefore meaning "White Russia" just like the endonym "Белару́сь".  DEEP!

倶楽部 (kurabu) for "club", where the characters can be interpreted loosely in sequence as "together", "fun" and "place".

合羽 (kappa) for the Portuguese capa, a kind of raincoat. The characters can mean "wings coming together", as the pointed capa resembles a bird with wings folded together.

Icelandic  DANGER: PIE!

eyðni, meaning "AIDS", is a PSM of the English acronym AIDS, using the pre-existent Icelandic verb eyða, meaning "to destroy"

tækni, meaning "technology, technique", derives from tæki, meaning "tool", combined with the nominal suffix -ni, but is, in fact, a PSM of the Danish (or international) teknik, meaning "technology, technique"    TRUE neo-COGNATE! (re-) =>

tæknilegur "technical" and tæknir "technician"

okul école 'school' lat: schola (cf. the original Turkish coinage okula(ğ) <> oculus: eye
co-etymon of okul is Turkish oku- '(to) read', cf. okumak 'to read, study', okuma 'reading', okur 'reader'. Note the semantic affinity with Arabic كتب kataba 'wrote (masculine, singular)', the ultimate origin of Ottoman Turkish mektep.

synchronically, Turkish okul cannot be regarded as öztürkçe (pure Turkish) since the final -l is not a Turkish suffix and was imported ad hoc from French.

öz = purez erz!

I used to live with an Irish gal named Mhairi...everyone thought (from Facebook etc) her name was essentially 'Mary', but it was in fact, pronounced 'Very'.