

Although ancient and modern forms of the Greek language share many traits, it would be misleading to consider the two varieties of Greek identical. In fact, the concept of "Ancient Greek” is misleading. For centuries, Greek was split into more than seven regional dialects. Only in the fourth century B.C., under Alexander the Great, did a shared language develop. It was known as ''Koiné'' or ''Common Greek.'' It was from Koiné that ancient Greek, as it is understood today, was born.


21. [1] Ἀλυάττης δέ, ὡς οἱ ταῦτα ἐξαγγέλθη, αὐτίκα ἔπεμπε κήρυκα ἐς Μίλητον βουλόμενος σπονδὰς ποιήσασθαι Θρασυβούλῳ τε καὶ Μιλησίοισι χρόνον ὅσον ἂν τὸν νηὸν οἰκοδομέῃ. 
Heliattes so, as he tauta exa.yelled, hurtig ex.pump kyrie at Miletown, voule-man s'pfand faire.sosei Thrasybulos de and Milesians,	chronon	as'sein(great as) an son neuen eco-domain(bau).
And Alyattes, when this answer was reported to him, sent a herald forthwith to Miletos, desiring to make a truce with Thrasybulos and the Milesians for so long a time as he should be building [the temple?].

ὃ μὲν δὴ ἀπόστολος ἐς τὴν Μίλητον ἦν, Θρασύβουλος δὲ σαφέως προπεπυσμένος πάντα λόγον, καὶ εἰδὼς τὰ Ἀλυάττης μέλλοι ποιήσειν, μηχανᾶται τοιάδε·
He men so apo.stelled at thon Miletos an, Thrasybulos so sober pro-piep-man pan(all) lügen, and eye-see Heliattes mell-about® faireso, mechanit-he this[device]:
He then was being sent as envoy to Miletos; and Thrasybulos in the meantime being informed beforehand of the whole matter and knowing what Alyattes was meaning to do, contrived this device

ὅσος ἦν ἐν τῷ ἄστεϊ σῖτος καὶ ἑωυτοῦ καὶ ἰδιωτικός, τοῦτον πάντα συγκομίσας ἐς τὴν ἀγορὴν προεῖπε Μιλησίοισι, ἐπεὰν αὐτὸς σημήνῃ τότε πίνειν τε πάντας καὶ κώμῳ χρᾶσθαι ἐς ἀλλήλους. 
highth in an to gether(town) sisters(grain) and justice and idiostice, toutou pan-all [zu]sym.gkomies at thon agoron[assembly] pro-eipe[tell] Milesians, even either? signified, thothe pint de pan't'all and come kreis/craze/graze at alleleu'n.
He gathered together in the market-place all the store of provisions which was found in the city, both his own and that which belonged to private persons and he proclaimed to the Milesians that on a signal given by him they should all begin to drink and make merry with one another. 

