

Act V of Poenulus opens with Hanno speaking in Punic, his native language. The language of the next few lines (italicized) is uncertain but is believed to be "Lybic" [sic] (likely a misspelling of Libyc, a reference to one of the Berber languages) or Hebrew, if not Punic. Plautus then provides a Latin translation of the preceding lines:[12]

    Yth alonim ualonuth sicorathi symacom syth 930
    chy mlachthi in ythmum ysthyalm ych-ibarcu mysehi
    li pho caneth yth bynuthi uad edin byn ui
    bymarob syllohom alonim ubymysyrthohom
    byth limmoth ynnocho thuulech-antidamas chon
    ys sidobrim chi fel yth chyl is chon chen liful 935
    yth binim ys dybur ch-innocho-tnu agorastocles
    yth emanethi hy chirs aelichot sithi nasot
    bynu yid ch-illuch ily gubulim lasibithim
    bodi aly thera ynnynu yslym min cho-th iusim

    Ythalonimualoniuthsicorathiisthymhimihymacomsyth 940
    combaepumamitalmetlotiambeat
    iulecantheconaalonimbalumbar dechor
    bats . . . . hunesobinesubicsillimbalim
    esseantidamossonalemuedubertefet
    donobun.huneccilthumucommucroluful 945
    altanimauosduberithemhuarcharistolem
    sittesedanecnasotersahelicot
    alemusdubertimurmucopsuistiti
    aoccaaneclictorbodesiussilimlimmimcolus

    deos deasque veneror, qui hanc urbem colunt, 950
    ut quod de mea re huc veni rite venerim,
    measque hic ut gnatas et mei fratris filium
    reperire me siritis, di vostram fidem.
    [quae mihi surruptae sunt et fratris filium.]
    sed hic mihi antehac hospes Antidamas fuit; 955
    eum fecisse aiunt, sibi quod faciundum fuit.
    eius filium esse hic praedicant Agorastoclem:
    ad eum hospitalem hanc tesseram mecum fero;
    is in hisce habitare monstratust regionibus.
    hos percontabor qui hinc egrediuntur foras.[13]

An English translation is as follows:

    I worship the gods and goddesses who preside over this city, that I may have come hither with good omen as to this business of mine, on which I have come; and, ye gods, lend me your aid, that you may permit me to find my daughters and the son of my cousin; those who were stolen away from me, and his son from my cousin. But here lived formerly my guest Antidamas. They say that he has done that which he was doomed to do. They say that his son Agorastocles lives here. To him am I carrying with me this token of hospitality. He has been pointed as living in this neighbourhood. I'll make enquiry of these who are coming hither out of doors.[12]
