Judging all the evidence,  we learn that 
boats where already common in the Mediterranean,  
there is no copper in Egypt, 
the underdeveloped lower Egypt culture had copper too, 
there is much proof of significant trade between Egypt and Sinai, Israel, Nubia.
Nubia … Qustul … https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buhen 

Maybe the Uruki where after the Nubian copper resources after all.

Copper artifacts recovered from Nubia are the earliest evidence of metal smelting in sub-Saharan Africa, dating back sometime after 4000 BC and they were most eventually imports from Egypt.

This is crucial: Either 
Qustul copper was imported from Sinai all the way upriver OR
The Uruki did introduce smelting OR  
Some expert smelter somehow ended up in the middle of Africa 
Word of mouth was enough, because initially cold smelting was not high-tech

Either mud brick houses were introduced through Palestine or by the Uruki!
Either irrigation was developed independently in Egypt, or exchange via word of mouth, or brought to Egypt by the Uruki.

 at the end of the day this situation is less clear than I hope for.
Which normally means that there is not enough proof and the history was more boring.

So how I was can of the synchronicity and similarity of the cultural development be explained? Through far-reaching trading networks, regularly bringing artifacts from one culture to another in relatively short time. And through copying of ideas and word-of-mouth.

So is it possible that someone in Eridu was creating the serpopard seal while holding the Egyptian palette in his hands, a mere important artifact?
Giving the probability of archaeologists finding those two items by chance there are only two explanations: 
the Uruki were entertaining a regular trading network with Egypt and even had a seal for this destination which was so frequently used that it was found 5000 years later.
the Uruki had colonies in Egypt
the Uruki, or their relatives, were the local rulers in Egypt until Narmer
the Uruki even were the firsts pharaohs
the Uruki provided the dynastic race over several dynasties
It is proven that some of the later dynasties were actually local black people.

d) and e) can safely be ruled out because there would be a much stronger similarity of their proto-writing! even for c) the lack of similarity in their symbolic porto-writing systems poses a huge problem.
Maybe it can be explained away by …  huge distances and the relatively early destruction of their Qustul ‘center’ and the the lack of archaeological evidence for their hypothetical harbour cities. Maybe they were present in their temples and trade-posts, but not the hieroglyph defining dynasty.



The same model can be applied for all of the seven innovations that reached upper Egypt in those crucial 500 years:  An adventurer, ambassador or trader from Uruk or Palestine traveled to Egypt and brought his knowledge with him, was accepted at court and implemented it locally.

It is possible.
What is utterly implausible is that all those technologies were reinvented locally.
What remains most plausible is either the colony model.

Astonishingly, one of the inventions which initially looked like clearest proof for strong interactions, can actually be explained quite well via relatively independent development: Proto-writing.

Clearly people in Egypt developed their very own symbolic system early on, and used it for different means than clay seals, namely ivory tags and king-marks.
Why would colonists reinvent the seal system in Egypt when they were already familiar with the seal system from Eridu?  Maybe they quickly adopted something which is not found in the archaeological record, but for which there is some circumstantial evidence: writing on papyrus! Seals? And carving into ivory? This remains one of the weakest points of the colony theory.
On Christie’s and Sotheby’s you can find ample of Uruki stamps.

The earliest stamp-seals were found in Harageh, at the edge of the Fayum, and in Upper-Egypt at Naqa ed-Dêr. They appear to date from Naqada IIb-c. The earliest cylinder-seals were found by Flinders Petrie in Naqada during the 1894-1895 excavations. The first one of the two seals discovered by Petrie is a limestone cylinder left in tomb N 1863 and now preserved at the University College in London.
So there were seals after all! Good night.

 I hate to say it about the serpopard is still the smoking gun.
If nothing else it does indicate that the world back then was already way stronger connected then we usually imagine. Maybe through pastoral nomads? Sects who had their temple in every part of the known world? And let’s not forget the important of Royal embassies and ambassadors … before the creation of states?? The serpopard is biting its own tail.
Traders or colonists or local elites and gradual widespread buildup of kingship + ‘civilization’.



