herodotus.txt

Massagetai	-> getai wrong split ;)
Ma.sage.tai	massage massege <> Ingul angeln Boten Budha!!


This Crœsus, first of all the Barbarians of whom we have knowledge, subdued certain of the Hellenes and forced them to pay tribute, while others he gained over and made them his friends.

Those whom he subdued were the Ionians, the Aiolians, and the Dorians who dwell in Asia; and those whom he made his friends were the Lacedemonians. But before the reign of Crœsus all the Hellenes were free; for the expedition of the Kimmerians, which came upon Ionia before the time of Crœsus, was not a conquest of the cities but a plundering incursion only. ;)

Now the supremacy which had belonged to the Heracleidai came to the family of Crœsus, called Mermnadai
… were descendants of Lydos the son of Atys, whence this whole nation was called Lydian, having been before called Meonian. From these the Heracleidai, descended from Heracles and the slave-girl of Iardanos, obtained the government, being charged with it by reason of an oracle; and they reigned for two-and-twenty generations of men,
five hundred and five years, handing on the power from father to son.

for among the Lydians as also among most other Barbarians it is a shame even for a man to be seen naked.


Matienians @ Turkey


72. Now the Cappadokians are called by the Hellenes Syrians;[85] and these Syrians, before the Persians had rule, were subjects of the Medes, but at this time they were subjects of Cyrus. For the boundary between the Median empire and the Lydian was the river Halys; and this flows from the mountain-land of Armenia through the Kilikians, and afterwards, as it flows, it has the Matienians on the right hand and
the Phrygians on the other side;

 Now the Panionion is a sacred place on the north side of Mycale, set apart by common agreement of the Ionians for Poseidon of Helike[152]; and this Mycale is a promontory of the mainland running out Westwards towards Samos, where the Ionians gathering together from their cities used to hold a festival which they called the Panionia.

Soloeis, which is the extreme point of Libya, Libyans (and of them many races) extend along the whole coast, except so much as the Hellenes and Phenicians hold; but in the upper parts, which lie above the sea-coast and above those people whose land comes down to the sea, Libya is full of wild beasts; and in the parts above the land of wild beasts it is full of sand, terribly waterless
and utterly desert.

 Bactrians: these are the most warlike of the Indians,
and these are they who make expeditions for the gold.

 but as to the extremities of Europe towards the West, I am not able to speak with certainty: for neither do I accept the tale that there is a river called in Barbarian tongue Eridanos, flowing into the sea which lies towards the North Wind, whence it is said that amber comes; 
 nor do I know of the real existence of "Tin Islands"[102] from which tin[103] comes to us: 
 for first the name Eridanos itself declares that it is Hellenic and that it does not belong to a Barbarian speech, but was invented by some poet; 
 and secondly I am not able to hear from any one who has been an eye-witness, though I took pains to discover this,
that there is a sea on the other side of Europe. !!!
However that may be, tin and amber certainly come to us from the extremity of Europe. ;)

Then again towards the North of Europe, there is evidently a quantity of gold by far larger than in any other land: as to how it is got, here again I am not able to say for certain, but it is said to be
carried off from the GRIFFINS by Arimaspians, a one-eyed race of men. ;)

SCYTHIANS Scythians = SCOLOTOI Scolotoi	S'kolo.Tai Sichel <> scolar? skull! skill
5. Now the Scythians say that their nation is the youngest of all nations, and that this came to pass as follows:--The first man who ever existed in this region, which then was desert, was one named 
TARGITAOS: begotten three sons,
Lipoxaïs
Arpoxaïs
Colaxaïs
xaïs <> tai?

Colaxaïs, they say, established three kingdoms for his sons
THREE SANct number! Trinity Treaty Tribute Territory …  !!!

From Lixopaïs, they say, are descended those Scythians who are called the race of the Auchatai; from the middle brother Arpoxaïs those who are called Catiaroi and Traspians

AUCHATAI Auchatai		OxTaur Tai!!!
CATIAROI	Catiaroi		kHatti! Roi~Leo!	<> SCYTHI
PARALATAI Paralatai <> parler, palavi Tai / tians	<> Parther

youngest of them the "Royal" tribe

and the whole together are called, they say, Scolotoi, after the name of their king;[12] but the Hellenes gave them the name of Scythians. 7. Thus the Scythians say they were produced; and from the time of their origin, that is to say from the first king Targitaos, to the passing over of Dareios against them, they say that there is a period of a THOUSAND YEARS and no more. 
~1200BC!

Now this sacred gold is guarded by the kings with the utmost care, and they visit it every year with solemn sacrifices of propitiation: moreover if any one goes to sleep while watching in the open air over this gold during the festival, the Scythians say that he does not live out the year;

 and there is given him for this so much land as he shall ride round himself on his horse in one day. Now as the land was large, Colaxaïs, they say, established three kingdoms for his sons; and of these he made one larger than the rest, and in this the gold is kept.


 But as to the upper parts which lie on the North side of those who dwell above this land, they say one can neither see nor pass through any further by reason of feathers which are poured down; for both the earth and the air are full of feathers, and this is that which shuts off the
view.


Hellenes who dwell about the Pontus say as follows:-- Heracles driving the cattle of Geryones came to this land, then
desert, which the Scythians now inhabit; and Geryones, says the tale, dwelt away from the region of the Pontus, living in the island called by the Hellenes ERYTHEIA Erytheia, near GADEIRA Gadeira which is outside the Pillars of Heracles by the Ocean.

ERYTHEIA the "Red Isle" was an island located in the far western stream of the earth-encircling river Okeanos (Oceanus) which was bathed red by the light of the setting-sun. 

It was the home of the three-bodied giant Geryon and his fabulous herd of red-hided cattle. Herakles was sent to fetch these as one of his twelve labours and sailed to the island in the cauldron-boat of the sun-god Helios. Menoites (Menoetes), who herded the cattle of Haides on the island, warned Geryon of the hero's approach.

Erytheia was one of several mythical realms located in the far west. Its neighbours included Hesperia, garden of the Hesperides, Sarpedon, isle of the Gorgones, and Leuke the White, home of the blessed dead. Further west on the far shore of the river Okeanos lay the gloomy netherworld realm of Haides.

Late Greek writers identified Erytheia with southern Spain and Hesperia with the Atlantic coast of north-west Africa. The island also shared its name with the Red (Erythraian) Sea between Egypt and Arabia and the two were often confounded.
Arimaspians ~Arians, Arimas? PIONS

it would seem that the extremities which bound the rest of the world on every side and enclose it in the midst, possess the things which by us are thought to be the most beautiful and the most rare. <3


[in Scythia a storm came], when Heracles woke he sought for his mares; and having gone over the whole land, at last he came
to the region which is called Hylaia; and there he found in a cave a
kind of twofold creature formed by the union of a maiden and a
serpent, whose upper parts from the buttocks upwards were those of a woman, but her lower parts were those of a snake. 
mares -> mermaid! for I have by thee THREE SONS.  <> bible SEM,Ham,yafet
a) Agathyrsos Acha Thyrseus!!
b) Gelonos ??
c) Skythes OK

1) able to stretch this bow as I do now, and to be girded[12a] with this girdle, him cause to be the settler of this land;
 to this day wear cups attached to their girdles

nomad Scythians dwelling in Asia, being hard pressed in war by the Massagetai,
left their abode and crossing the river Araxes(!?!) came towards the Kimmerian land (for the land which now is occupied by the Scythians is said to have been in former times the land of the Kimmerians); and the Kimmerians, when the Scythians were coming against them, took counsel together, seeing that a great host was coming to fight against them; and it proved that their opinions were divided, both opinions being vehemently maintained, but the better being that of their kings: for the opinion of the people was that it was necessary to depart and that they ought not to run the risk of fighting against so many,[14] but that of the kings was to fight for their land with those who came against them: and as neither the people were willing by means to agree to the counsel of the kings nor the kings to that of the people, the people planned to depart without fighting and to deliver up the land to the invaders resolved to die and to be laid in their own land, and not to flee with
the mass of the people, considering the many goods of fortune which they had enjoyed, and the many evils which it might be supposed would come upon them, if they fled from their native land. Having resolved upon this, they parted into two bodies, and making their numbers equal they fought with one another: and when these had all been killed by
one another's hands, then the people of the Kimmerians buried them by the bank of the river Tyras (where their burial-place is still to be
seen), and having buried them, then they made their way out from the land, and the Scythians when they came upon it found the land deserted of its inhabitants.

And there are at the present time in the land
of Scythia Kimmerian walls, and a Kimmerian ferry; and there is also a region which is called Kimmeria, and the so-called Kimmerian Bosphorus. It is known moreover that the Kimmerians, in their flight
to Asia from the Scythians, also made a settlement on that peninsula
on which now stands the Hellenic city of Sinope; and it is known too that the Scythians pursued them and invaded the land of Media, having missed their way; for while the Kimmerians kept ever along by the sea in their flight, the Scythians pursued them keeping Caucasus on their right hand, until at last they invaded Media, directing their course inland. This then which has been told is another story, and it is common both to Hellenes and Barbarians.



Chorasmians themselves, the Hyrcanians, Parthians, Sarangians, and Thamanaians;



Euxine Sea
Ister !
Caucasus
"the North Wind." never just north!

what the Hellenes
CALL … ! /kyna/ (bitch) the Medes call /spaca/.