The few records remaining from the time indicate that the Sea Peoples were made up of many ethnicities, given names like the Peleset, Tjeker, Shekelesh and Denyen. Some of the names -- Hatti and Eshewan -- suggest that the Sea Peoples may well have included Hittite and Achaean survivors amongst them. Later descriptions indicate that carts with noncombatants and children followed the Sea Peoples on their attacks.

Unlike the hordes of later Roman times, however, with their separate waves, feuds and identities, the Sea Peoples seem to have functioned more as a confederation, pulling off sophisticated military attacks on well-defended targets.

This too makes perfect sense. After all, they wouldn't just have been raveningly hell-bent on destruction. Compare to 16th and 17th century pirates who, finding themselves in a similar situation, hammered out quasi-democratic rules for governing themselves and dividing the spoils. Such a multi-ethnic alliance of convenience might well have been what Egyptian rulers at the time dubbed with epithets like the Nine Bows.


According to the Persians best informed in history, the Phoenicians began the quarrel. These people, who had formerly dwelt on the shores of the Erythraean Sea, having migrated to the Mediterranean and settled in the parts which they now inhabit, began at once, they say, to adventure on long voyages, freighting their vessels with the wares of Egypt and Assyria ...[18]

The Greek historian Strabo believed that the Phoenicians originated from Bahrain.[19] Herodotus also believed that the homeland of the Phoenicians was Bahrain.[20][21] This theory was accepted by the 19th-century German classicist Arnold Heeren who said that: "In the Greek geographers, for instance, we read of two islands, named Tyrus or Tylos, and Arad, Bahrain, which boasted that they were the mother country of the Phoenicians, and exhibited relics of Phoenician temples."[22] The people of Tyre in South Lebanon in particular have long maintained Persian Gulf origins, and the similarity in the words "Tylos" and "Tyre" has been commented upon.[23] However, there is little evidence of occupation at all in Bahrain during the time when such migration had supposedly taken place.[24]

Culturally, they appear to have derived uninterrupted from the chalcolithic cultures of the region. Byblos is attested as an archaeological site from the Old Kingdom of Egypt.

in The Perspective of the World that Phoenicia was an early example of a "world-economy" surrounded by empires. The high point of Phoenician culture and sea power is usually placed c. 1200–800 BC. Archaeological evidence consistent with this understanding has been difficult to identify. A unique concentration in Phoenicia of silver hoards dated between 1200 and 800 BC, however, contains hacksilver with lead isotope ratios matching ores in Sardinia and Spain.[25] This metallic evidence agrees with the biblical memory of a western Mediterranean Tarshish that supplied Solomon with silver via Phoenicia, during the latter's heyday (see 'trade', below).[26] 

Tarshish, also spelled Tharsis, (Hebrew: תַּרְשִׁישׁ‎) occurs in the Hebrew Bible with several uncertain meanings, most frequently as a place, probably a large city or region, far across the sea from the Land of Israel, which traded in metals with Israel and Phoenicia. 
 Targum of Jonathan render this as Carthage, but other biblical commentators as early as 1646 (Samuel Bochart) read it as Tartessos in ancient Hispania (the Iberian Peninsula). Tunis, Tarsus in Cilicia.
=> Torso Tarzan Tors... [weak] TOR -> Hektor ... Tyr!!! TYR=TAR?
 Tarshish was Sardinia because of the discovery of the Nora Stone, whose Phoenician inscription mentions Tarshish.
 identified the Cisjordan Corpus
its date-range overlaps with the traditional dates of the reigns of King Solomon and Hiram of Tyre. Hacksilber objects in these Phoenician hoards have lead isotope ratios that match ores in Sardinia and Spain. Contrary to translations that have been rendering Assyrian tar-si-si as 'Tarsus' up to the present time, Christine Thompson has shown that the Assyrian tablets inscribed in Akkadian indicate tar-si-si (Tarshish) was an island, and the poetic construction of Psalm 72 also points to its identity as a large island in the West. The island of Sardinia is indicated.  WTF  
Tar-si-si => Sicily
Tyr-si isle
Tyr-city

Dar-dar-nel
Dor-ian
Dar-fur
Diodorus 
Siculus

Solomon = Sol.amun

Dar-es-salam HAUS des Friedens
Daressalam
Da-ma-sku

3000 BC - use of copper tools in certain localities, probably reflecting non-Sicilian influences.

1600 BC - presence of an identifiable, distinct "Sicanian" culture across Sicily.

Given to poetic embellishment, few of these "foreign" authors appear to be particularly reliable, and some (particularly Diodoros Siculus) are notoriously whimsical. One need only look to the rather negative Greek and Roman characterizations of the neighboring Phoenicians and Carthaginians to appreciate the fact that historical bias and revisionism are nothing new.

There is little evidence that the Sicanians ever made wide use of any written language before the introduction of the Phoenician alphabet (shown here with the Greek and Early Roman alphabets), which they wrote from right to left. (Mycenean script has been found on some pieces of pottery.) On a pre-historic level, it seems probable that they were descended, for the most part, from Sicily's Bronze Age inhabitants. Indeed, the Sicans probably represented the main group descended from these first indigenous Sicilians.
The theory of the Sicanians' Iberian origin is supported by a rather few linguistic factors thought to be shared with early Iberian tongues

origin<=>connection

Spain's ancient Sicano River!!

The Sicanians' name probably derives from the chalcedony called "sica" found in some of the areas they inhabited, and from which they styled tools in the Neolithic era. An Iron Age presence is indicated at Gela,

The sica was a short sword or large dagger of ancient Illyrians, Thracians and Dacians, used in Ancient Rome too, originating in the Halstatt culture. It is also depicted on Trajan's Column; notably the Dacian king Decebalus is depicted committing suicide with one.

Elam citi in Tar-Sicily
Erice
É.rice
Eryx
Erytr
Erich
Erika
É.RUTH
E.rot.ica 
Ica.rus
Rich
Rix 
Rex 
Rick 
Ricardo 
Richard 
Recke 
Reck 
Ruck 
Rock(kleid) 
Rock(stein) 
Rock(erotik) 
Rock(musik)

É.gesta

