Full text of "Western origin of the early Chinese civilisation from 2,300 B. C. to 200 A. D. : or, Chapters on the elements derived from the old civilisations of west Asia in the formation of the ancient Chinese culture"
See other formats

I 



WESTERN ORIGIN 



OF THE 



EARLY CHINESE CIVILISATION 



Other Works of Prof. Dr. Terrien de Lacouperie on 

Oriental Archaeology. 



Eakly History of the Chinese Civilisation. A Lecture. London, 
1880. 

The Languages of China before the Chinese (with Researches on 
the Arrival of the Chinese and the Sources of their Civilisation), 
8vo., 148 pp., 1887; French edition, 1888, 210 pp., greatly en- 
larged, f Laureated hy the French Institute, i 

Formosa Notes, on Mss., Languages, and Races, 1887, 82 pp. 

The Old Babylonian Characters and their Chinese Derivates, 1888. 

Catalogue of Chinese Coins from the Vllth cent. B.C. to A.D. 621, 
including the series in the British Museum, 18'.»2, cr. 4to., Ixxi., 
443 pp. (^Laureated by the French Institute.) 

The Oldest Book of the Chinese, the Yh King, and its Authors. 
Vol. I. History and Method, 1892, 8vo„ xxvii , 121 pp. 

Beginnings of Writing in Central and Eastern Asia. Notes on 
450 Embryo-writings and scripts. 1894, 8vo., 207 pp. 

Asiatic Studies (8 mem.) Svo. 

Babylonian and Chinese Researches (10 mem.) iSvo. 

Across Ancient Asia (IG mem.) 8vo. 

And over 1:^0 pa pern and arufinal articles on separate subjects (Sinology, 
Assyrioloyy, C ha Idea -Chinese, Fthnoloyy, Linyuistics, and Numis- 
matics of the East.) 



In Preparation. 

History of the Civilisation of China. 2 Vols. 

Indo-Chinese Philology, and its place in the Science of Language. 



WESTERN ORIGIN 



OF THE 



;arly Chinese Civilisation- 

FROM 2,300 B.C. TO 200 A.D. 

R, CHAPTERS ON THE ELEMENTS DERIVED FROM THE OLD 
CIVILISATIONS OF WEST ASIA IN THE FORMATION 
OF THE ANCIENT CHINESE CULTURE. 



BY 

TERRIEN DE LACOUPERIE 




London : 
ASHER & Co., 13, Bedford Street, Covent Garden, 

1894. 



■<^> 



^7 



I ^ 



-] / 6'ZO 




TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



11. 


^§ 


1 


11. 


)) 


3 


11. 


>» 


5 



Chapters. Pages 

Introduction ... ... ... ix-xiii. 

A Resumh and a Survhy... ... 1 

General Conditions of the Problem 3 
Traces in China of a Western 

Origin and its date .. ... 4 

IV. ,, 13 (Preliminary List of) Elements of Culture 

RECEIVED BY THE CiVILISERS OF ChINA 

FROM Babylonia and Elam ... 9, 378 

Sciences and Arts.. ... ... 9,384 

Writing and Literature ... ... 14,346 

Institutions and Religions ... ... 15^, 348 

Historical Traditions and Legends ... 21, 349 

Special Proofs of an Elamite Origin 25, 348 
Items of Assyro-Babylonian and other 
Civilisations entered into Ancient 
China through later Channels 29, 85,3 50, 357 

Ancient Dynasties of Western Origin ... 30, 350 

Eastern Jade Traffic ... ... 81, 351 

Ancient Route of the Eastern Sea-trade ... 36, 353 
Ancient Routes by Land, South and 

South-west ... ... ... 38, 353 

Trade of Shuh-Szetchuen, and the routes 46, 196, 354 
A Resume of the two periods, 20UO-770 

B.C. ... ... ... 69, 854 

VII. ,, Items of Babylonian. Persian, Indian, 
Egyptian and Greek civilisations en- 
tered into China from 770 b.c. to 220 a.d. 85 
,, 97 Retrospects ... ... ... 85, 357 

Fourth Period, 770-481 B.C. 

,,102 The Ages of Wonderism ... ... 88,368 

„ 109 Erythraean Sea-traders and Chinese 

Wonderism ... ... .. !<6, 359 

130 Influences from the South-west and begin- 
nings of Taoism... .. ... 117, 361 

147 Tartar Influences in the North-west, Bar- 
barous Customs ... ... ...181,361 

155 Internal Reactions, Confucianism ... 138, 363 

Fifth Period, 480-221, B.C. 
163 Formation of Neo-Taoism or Taoszeism 145 



J> 


13 


>) 


19 


J) 


25 


>) 


27 


V. „ 


32 


^L „ 


34 


1) 


36 


) J 


37 


)> 


42 


)) 


46 


») 


52 


19 


81 



)l 



f) 



5> 



VI, TABU or CONTENTS. 

§§ 174 West Influences by the North-east ... 155 

,,181 Innovations concerning Fire ... ... 159, 364 

,,184 Same continued ... ... ... 164 

,, 187 Other Innovations ... ... ... 169 

,, 191 Innovations of Hindu Origin ... ... 171, 865 

,,197 Northern Influence... ... ...176,365 

,, 198 Western Influence by Southern channels ... 178, 366 

,, 191 Hormuz Navy in South-east China ... 178 

„ 207 The Great Semi-Chinese State of T'su ... 190, 367 

„ 212 The Non-Chinese State of Shuh ... 196 

Sixth Period, 221 B.C. to 220 A.D. 
,,219 The Empire ... ... ... 20H, 367 

„ 227 Introduction of Buddhism ... ... 210, 267 

„ 234 Private Intercourse with the West ... 213, 368 

,,239 Official „ „ „ ... 2I8 

246 „ „ „ „ ... 229, 269 

249 ,, , „ with South-east and South 232, 269 

259 Changes and competition in the Sea-trade ... 239, 370 

,, 269 Official Intercourse with the South-west ... 249, ^70 

,, 280 Foreign and Chinese Trading Navies ... 25S^», 370 

VIII. Excursus ... ... ... ... 264 

„ 284 The Si Wang Muhs and Muh Wang's Ex- 
pedition to Turkestan in c. !)80B.C. 264, 370 
„ 297 On some old Geographical Knowledge of 

the West ... ... ... 27o, 371 

„ 29ii On the Gnomon and Sundial ... ...277 

„ ;502 On the Clepsydra ... ... ...279 

,, 305 Origin of the South-pointing Chariots and 

Marine^Uompass... ... ... 283 

,, 309 Foreign Historical Sources of Ancient 

Chinese Astronomy ... ... 286 

IX. Meeting Objections ... ... ... 291 

,,312 Southern Origin ... ... ...291 

„ 313 Self-growth and Development ... ... 291 

,,315 Monosyllabic Theory ... ...293 

,,316 Astrognosie ... ... ...294,371 

,, 321 On Bak as a Name of the Earliest Civilised 

Chinese ... ... ...302 

,, 330 Alleged difficulty of the .Journey from West 

to East Asia ... . . 308 

,,338 Silence of Western Antiquity ... ...314 

X. Essay of Historical and Geographical Recon- 
struction FROM Traditions and Legends of 
the Migrations of the Civilised Bak Sings 
from West Asia to China 2332-2285-2283 b.c. 316 
,,240 Sources of Information ... ...316 

,, 343 From their original seat to the Jade Mines... 317, 372 
,, 351 From the .Jade Mines to South-west 

Kansuh ... ... ... 325 

354 From South-west Kansuh to South Shansi... 328 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. VII- 

XI. Additions and Emendations to thk preceding 

Chai'Tkrs, §§ 367-:579... ... ... 338 

XII. Chronological Sketch ok the Pre-Chinese 
and Imported Civilisations of China in 
ANTiyuiTY ... ... ... ...373 

I. ^ 380" Native Civilisation of the Pre-Chinese ... 373 
II. ,, 383 Imported Civilisation by the Chinese Bak 

Sings ... ... ... 376 

Of their own ... ...376 

,, 386 Acquired in South-west Asia ... 378 

III. ,, 390 Chronological List of Western Relations 
with China and their Importations from 
2283 B.C. to 220 A.D ... ...381 

,, 39u From Hwang-ti to the Hia dynasty, c. 

2280-1954 B.C. ... ...381 

„ 391 From the Hia to the Shang, c 1954-1686 

B.C. ... ... ... 381 

„ 392 During the Shang-Yn dynasty, c 1086- 

1111 B.C. .. ... ...382 

„ 393 During the West Tchou dynasty, 1110- 

770 B.C ...383 

„ 394 During the East Tchou dynasty, 770-481 

B.C. ... ... ... 385 

,, 395 During the Contending States, 481-221 

BC. ... ... ... 386 

,,396 Chinese Empire, 221 B.C. to 220 A.D. ...389 

,, 3!)7 Concluding Remarks ... ... 395 

,, 400 Comparative Chronology ... ... 396 

Alphabetical Index ... ... ... 398 

List of important Errata 



INTRODUCTION. 



The just claims of the civilisation of the Chinese, the largest family of 
mankind, to a high antiquity uninterrupted«to the present day, which 
makes it the young contemporary of the old civilisations, now dis- 
appeared, of the Egyptians, Babylonians, Elamites, Assyrians, Egisans, 
and Pseudo-Hittites, alone invest it with an unusual interest for the 
student of history, notwithstanding its remoteness from our western 
activity. While scanty remains and scattered survivals are all that 
have been preserved of the former glory of all these civilisations, long 
swept away, the case is altogether different with that of China, which 
is still alive, with its immense advantage, for general history of an un- 
interrupted continuity since its beginning. 

That civilisation has long appeared unaccountable, and its similarities 
and dissemblances as compared with our own have caused it to be taken 
as evidence of most conflicting theories otherwise unsupported: But the 
science of history has now shown, in all known instances, that centres 
of civilisation never arose elsewhere than amid a conflict of races, when 
sparks, coming from a more enlightened quarter, have brought in an 
initiating and leading spirit, under the form of one or several men, or 
of immigrating tribes, incited by trade, religion, or in search of safety 
The same science has shown moreover that man has always travelled 
more extensively than was formerly supposed, that " there is no such 
thing as the history of one country," and that intelligent nations always 
borrow fresh elements of civilisation whenever they have the opportu- 
nity of doing so. And it has come to be the object of the present work 
to show that China has been no exception to the rules here formulated, 



X. INTRODUCTION 

but is on the contrary an important instance of the general fact 
gradually disclosed by the process of historical research, that in all in- 
,, vestigated cases, culture is the result of an introduction from abroad, 
and not of a spontaneous development. 

It was the trade by which were imported into Chaldea lapis-lazuli, 
rubies, turquoises, silver, tin, asbestos, and nephrite jade, dark and 
white, from Khorasan, Badakshan, and Eastern Turkestan, which led 
western civilisation to China after 2,300 «B.C. And it is also 
trade, alone at first, with religion afterwards, which has caused com- 
munications, although irregular and occasional, to take place uninter- 
ruptedly between the West and East of Asia, as shoun for the first 
time in the present work, since 2,300 B.C. by land, and after 700 B.C. 
also by sea. Thus it has happened that notwithstanding its geographi- 
cal distance, which always required time to traverse, China has never 
remained^ withoutknowledge of the progress of Western civilisation, 
and of this knowledge has taken advantage. 

Intelligent, but lacking originality and creative power, deeply 
imbued with reverence for the ancients, and specially for those who 
had introduced civilisation in their land, blindly conservative and re- 
specting precedents and routine, somnolent still in their worship 
of olden times, the Chinese in their living past, have preserved to this 
day in their literature and civilisation many remains and survivals 
from the ancient civilisations with which they happened to have had 
some relations. Of course no absolute proof of this fact would rest 
on single traits of agreement ; but it is the mass of the coincidences and 
similarities, their appearance by groups, and the homogeneity of these 
groups, the historical and material circumstances agreeing, that enforce 
conviction due allowance being made for the idiosyncrasy and adaptive 
process of the borrowers.' In all the cases where verification is possible 
we have found that innovations and changes in Western Asia have 
made their mark in China some time afterwards. The reverse circum- 
stance did not happen, and the influence of one side on the other re- 
mained unreciprocated, because China in antiquity had very little to give 
to West Asia, with the exception of her silk, long undesired because of 
the Indian article, and of some of her fruits which were duly carried 
by the ancient trade to Persia. Staple goods were not worth the diffi- 
culties of the journeys, and for many ages trade made by pedlars could 
consist but of rarities and curios. 



INTROnUCTION XI. 

Let lis remark here that the Chinese authorities themselves claimed 
an origin from the north-west for a large part of their civilisation, 
and did not hesitate in olden times to recognise an exotic source where 
such was the case ; and that it is only the modern native writers, 
authors of large compilations and mirrors of history, more patriotic 
than trustworthy, the only ones with whose works convenience made* 
the ancient sinologists acquainted, who have systematically attributed 
every progress and innovation to their sages of antiquity, without 
having regard to statements to the contrary. 

The problem has long attracted the attention of scholars, who have 
attempted with the inadequate lights of their time to find the solution 
it required. The oldest explanation offered has been necessarily the 
missionary solution of a migration from the plains of Sennaar 
(Jesuits, J. Edkins, 1871), McClatchie (1856). There was the sug- 
gestion of a late Egyptian colony by Deguignes in 1758, which sur- 
vived in the Egyptian parentage put forward by Goodwin, the 
Egyptologist, 1869. Under the pressure of the progress made in the 
deciphering of cuneiforms appeared the suggestion of a Scythic 
origin in common with Babylonia, held by Pauthier, De Rosny, Fr. 
Lenormant (1868). The field was enlarged in subsequent suggestions, 
including Egypt in the scheme, favoured by Hyde Clarke (1878) and W. 
St. Chad Boscawen (187!^')- ^- Schlegel in 1875 claimed in an 
elaborate work a native antiquity of 19,000 years for Chinese astron- 
omy of the stone age; while in 1890, E. Faber, in a special paper asked 
only 4000 years for a similarly independent origin. James Legge in 
1865, John Chalmers in the following year in a little book, Wells 
Williams, and inl 877, Freiherr von Richthofen, have on the other 
hand given as their decided opinion a western origin undiscernible or 
by way of East Turkestan. Other scholars and sinologists, over- 
whelmed by the intricacy of the historical literature of China — inter- 
woven as it is by numerous generations of native commentators and 
thinkers, who have each improved upon the work of their predecessors 
— find themselves unable 'to throw over the yoke, and not seeing 
through this fictitious atmosphere, stand apart, and incline towards a 
blind and dangerous scepticism which goes so far as to doubt of 
everything, the historical existence of Confucius included. 

The most recent investigator, C. J. Ball, 1890-1893, a collabor- > 
ateur of The Babylonian and Oriental Hecord, in several papers, 



Xll. INTRODUCTION 

published in the Proceedinr/s of the Society of Biblical Archeology, 
starting without acknowledgement from my own disclosures, has 
concluded in favour of a close relationship of the Akkadian and Chinese 
language, a derivation (established by me in 1888) of the Chinese 
characters from those of Babylonia between Gudea and Khammurabi, 
and a migration of civilised Akkadians to China at that time. 

In 1880, after twelve years' labour (ten of them spent in testing 
the inefficient solutions hitherto proposed), and the help of the discoveries 
in Assyriology, I was enabled to launch a first and approximate 
sketch of my views concerning the origin in the twenty-third 
century of the civilisers arrived in China from South-west Asia, which 
fact is the first of the instances of intercourse between the West and 
China examplified in the present work. This was the first tivie that 
this solution ivas proposed, and nobody had ever even suggested it before 
me. Approved by a few, misunderstood by many, maligned by others, 
unknown to most, I have continued my researches with the growing 
conviction that I was at last on the right path, and that 
the Chinese, fated as they are to have a great influence on the 
material future of mankind, were not apart of the concert 
of civilised nations in antif^iuty. Strong in the early appro- 
bation of such eminent scholars as the late W. S. W. Vaux and 
Frangois Lenormant (1880), Sir Henry Eawliuson (1884), my friends, 
Prof. R. K. Douglas (I879j and the lamented Colonel H. Yule, I 
could hear the regretted Georg von der Gabelentz tell me at Vienna 
in 1887, that it would not be surprising if fifty years elapsed 
before that Routine, the overwhelming Ruler of Sinology, could climb 
down under the glaring light of my discoveries. Since then however 
some more confirmatory evidence has come down from several sides, 
and I may be permitted to say that my views have now received the 
approbation of no less than four scores of scholars of eminence, in- 
cluding some of the leading Sinologists, Assyriologists, and Orientalists 
of the day. Moreover my works have been laureated on two occasions 
by the Academic des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres. However, vested 
interests, prejudices, indift'ereuce to new views, and unacquaintance 
with the evidence put forward — not so much probably as the clumsy 
way in which my disclosures have appeared piecemeal before the 
world, spread as they have been during the last fourteen years in 
some one hundred and fifty difi'erent publications (books, pamphlets, 



INTRODUCTION Xlll. 

and original articles) — have not permitted as yet many other scholars 
to judge of the question with a fair knowledge of the case. This 
work, I hope, will help them to do so. 

I candidly confess that when the present book was begun (writing 
and printing in 1889), I did not know what its conclusions would be. 
My object was simply (I) a resume of a certain number of previous 
articles, monographs, and even books in which I had studied separate 
points of Chinese archaeology, whose western origin from the Chaldea- 
Elamite civilisation had come out clearly to me and to many of my 
readers ; and (2) a continuance of the enquiry into such other sources as 
had subsequently contributed to the formation of Chinese culture. But 
during the five years of continuous research which have elapsed since then, 
I have found gradually that a few of the western elements enumerated 
in the first lists (pp. 9-27) had been pushed up too early on insufficient 
grounds, while a large number of others had been overlooked. These 
faults have been successively corrected by cross references as the work 
advanced towards its completion and specially in the chapter of Additions 
and Emendations (pp. 338-372). Pages 2-258 are reprinted from The 
Babylonian and Oriental Record, 1889-1894. The two most important 
disclosures in the interval have been the ascertained journey of Muh- 
wang in 986 B.C., and the arrival of Erythraean sea-traders on the 
coasts of China as early as the VII. cent. 

One side only, limited to ancient times, of the history of Civilisation 
in China, is studied in the present work. The complete history forms 
a much larger one, on which I am now engaged. 

This volume has been written and produced under unusual difficul- 
ties of a material nature, and requires every possible indulgence from the 
reader, who is invited to read first tlie pp. 373-397 before proceeding with 
any other part. 

Terrien de Lacouperie. 

Doct. of Philosophy and of Letters (^Lovan.) ; Laureate 
of the Institut de France (Academie des Liscrip- 
tions, 1S89-1893) ; M. c. Philological Society : 
M. hon. Royal Asiatic Society ,• M. C. Academie de 
Stanislas, Nancy ; M. hon. Sociefe Orientate, Lou- 
vain ; M. C. Peking Oriental Society ; M. C. 
Academie des Sciences, Marseilles ; JI. C. Societe 
d'Archeologie, Bordeaux; .1/. Societe de Linguistique, 
Paris ; Prof, of Indo-Chinese Philology (formerly 
of University College, T^ondou) :; Director of "The 
Babylonian and Oriental Rec(ird," dc. 
FuLHAM, June, 1894. 




WESTERN ORIGIN 

OF THS 

EARLY CHINESE CIVILISATION, 



Chaptfrs on the elements derived from the Old Civilisations 
OF West Asia in the formation of the Ancient Chinese 
Culture. 



CHAP. I. — A Resume and a Survey. 

In beginning the following chapters I propose first to summarise, 
Ch. III., IV., and V., in order to grasp -them with greater facility, the 
whole series of evidences (including probably a few immature cases 
which will be confirmed or replaced by better ones in the course of our 
enquiry), on which rests chiefly at present my own discovery, 
made since 187i'-80, that the early civihsation and writing of the ^ 
Chinese were simply derivations from those of Elam and Chaldsea, 
about and after the time of Gudea and Dungi,i derivations carried 
eastward later on to the Flowery land, namely in the XXIII. century 
before our era. Searching the solution of the Chinese problem has 
been a labour of love and duty^ and the work of years. For long my 
researches were unavailing. As explained elsewhere,-^ I had worked 
on a wrong path. I was prejudiced by the speculative views of 
several eminent scholars, who, misguided by the false notion of an 
antiquity very remote for the civilisation of China, had suggested as i 
plausible a common_descent of that civilisation with those of Western y 
Asia, and especially with that of Chaldaea from an imaginary centre of / 
activity in Upper Asia. As a result of my investigations. I was com- 
pelled to give up all these views in succession. The comparatively late 
beginnings of the Chinese civilisation showed themselves to be the out- 
come of an imjjortation, not a distinct growth from common^seeds, bu' 
simply a loan, a derivation, an extension eastward from a much older x 
form of culture in the west. I was led slowly by overwhelming 
evidences, direct and circumstantial from the Chinese and W. Asiatic 
sides, to the unexpected disclosures alluded to, and which, however 



Z ORIGIN OF THE EAELY 

astonishing they may appear to those who have not followed the 
gradual advance of my researches, are now proved to be an assured 
progress of our knowledge and solid discoveries of historical facts.^ 

The inferences drawn from my investigations in the true path, as 
put forth in my pamphlet of 1880 on the Early history of the Chinese 
oivilisation, have been to my great satisfaction, slowly but surely con- 
firmed in their main lines, rectified and made precise in their details. 
The proofs I have collected, or which have been brought in the mean 
time to my workshop as confirmative evidence by the advancement of 
knowledge and the works of several enquirers, are rather scattered in 
an inconveniently large number of books, papers, and periodicals, and 
often hidden from view in the notes of some tractates. Though fre- 
quently alluded to and not yet completed in the series of monographs 
which I devote to them, they have not been arranged together with 
sufficient clearness. The provisory resume of Ch, III., IV., and V. is 
intended to make up this deficiency and to show that, marshalled to- 
gether, they constitute under every respect, notwithstanding its insuffi- 
ciency, the most irresistible array of facts ever put forth in support of 
a historical discovery. But this first resum^ will have to be taken as 
a starting ground, open to revision, as the exact date of introduction 
of several items of civilisation, inscribed therein, cannot be determined 
but by the forthcoming survey of the relations of West Asia with 
China in antiquity. The expected results of this survey will be two- 
fold, viz.: a sifting of the provisory lists which deprived of a few en- 
tries cannot fail to be increased by numerous additions ; and disclosures 
of many subsequent importations. At the end of our task, after having 
answered to objections past and future, we shall have to gather from 
these researches any conclusions that may be suggested by facts dis- 
closed in the course of our enquiries. 

Notes. — 

1) The exact date of Dungi and Gudea is not yet ascertained, and 
Assyriologists' opinions vary between the 25th and 28th century. 
One of the most learned antiquarians of China, Hwang P'u-Mi, of 
the third century, mentions an old legendary tradition, attributing 
to the Empire of Shennung-Sargon an extension of itO0,0UO li from 
west to east, and telling how Hwang-ti made boats and carriages to 
traverse this mighty territory. This looks like a forgotten souvenir 
of the great distance of Sargon — Shennung's domains in the west, 
and of the journeys of Hwang-ti and his followers to the other end 
in the east. 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 3 

. 2) In connection with the huilding up of the philosophy of history. 
Cfr. my ex})lanations pp. vii — viii. Introduction of Les langues 
de la Chine avant les Chinois, (Paris, 1888). 

3) Babylonia and China, p. 1 {B. ^- 0. R., I, 113). 

4) The number and certitude of proofs increase with the advance of 
knowledge and progress of research. In Dab/ilonia and China (1887) 
I had enumerated some sixty items of ChakUean and Elamite civilisation 
among the early Chinese; in the present paper mere than one hundred 
items are indicated. 

II. General Conditions of the Problem. 

The general conditions of the problem which I claim to have solved are 
rather simple. Four distinct civilisations appear in ancient history. The 
oldest hitherto known is that of Egypt, for which a length of 5500 years --'' 
before Christ is required as a minimum by the Egyptologists of the 
present day. Next to it is the Chaldjiian culture of unknown antiquity, 
though not yet enabled by the most recent research to claim on documental 
evidence more than -1500 years before our ^ra. A connection of the two, - 
either by common descent, or by development into the latter of 
a rude and incomplete derivation from the former, is an open ques- 
tion now under investigation. The peculiar civilisation of the Hittites 
is the most recently discovered; its origin is still unknown, its writing 
undeciphered, and its age unascertained. It is undoubtedly ancient, 
though not as old as the two others, and may be either an independent 
■-Tjffshoot from the same seeds which would have lingered in those quarters, or 
the regional development of partial loans and influences from the two older 
fpci of culture. Its geographical proximity favours equally the two views^. 

On the other side of the Asiatic continent, at a much later date than in 
Egypt and in Chaldfca, we find the fourth civilisation of antiquity, that of 
China. It appears, since its beginnings, in a curious state of relative ^ 
completeness, among mongoloid races renowned f(jr their character ultra- 
conservative and non-progressive. Discarding all the greatness of political 
power and universal knowledge, attributed to their early leaders by Chinese 
traditions and comments of later growth, and sifting all fabulous accounts, 
we find as a residue a few undisputable evidences showing a small num- ^ 
ber of familes arriving in the N. W. of present China, and in possession 
of a comparativjaly advanced civilization which explains the enthusiasm 
of after ages for these men, and has left a deep impression surviving 
to the present day in the mental habits of the whole people^. The ex- 
istence of these feelings and beliefs would have been difficult and even 



) 



/ 



4 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

impossible, should traces or traditions of savage beginnings, slow dev- 
elopment of civilization, pictorial rudiments of writing, and successive 
progresses of knowledge by self-growth, have ever existed among the 
Chinese, but nothing of the kind exists in their early souvenirs. 

Therefore, at a first glance at the problem, the probabilities are in favour 
of an importation from S. W. Asia or Egypt, the only parts of the 
world endowed with civilization at that ancient time. 

Notes. 5) The best resume on this civilisation is that of Prof. A. H. 
Sayce : The Hittites. The story of a forgotten Empire. (By-paths of 
Bible knowledge XII. London, 1888.) Also Dr. \\ . Wright, 
The Empire of the Hittites. London, 2nd edit. 1886); Perrot and 
Chipiez, Histoire de VArt dans VAntiquite, vol. IV. Paris, 1887. — 
On these questions of origin cfr. some views in my paper : 'The Ku- 
shites, loli!) were they? (Bab. & Or. R. I, 25. 31.) 

6) We allude here, among other fe;iture3, to the Ancestj^al woi'ship, 
so prominent in all times in China, and still now the very basis 
of all their cult. 

III. Traces in China of a Westkrn Origix and its Date. 
^ Everything in Chinese anticjuity and traditions points to a western 
origin. No Sinologist who has studied the subject has been able to 
ascertain any other origin for the Chinese than one from the West^. 
It is through the N.W. of China proper that they have gradually invaded 
the country, and that their present greatness began from very small 
beginnings some forty centuries ago^. This alone would be sufficient, but 
there are a few traditions pointing to the same fact further west. 

Nakhunte (modern : Nai Hwang ti). the first leader of the Bak 
tribes who reached China, had led his people into Chinese Turkestan, 
and then along the Kashgar or Tarym river, reaching after a time 
eastward of the Kuenlun, "the Flowery land," a name which its great 
fertiHty had long merited to the lands of future China^. Such is the 
lesson we learn from a comparison of the Chinese traditions about the 
wanderings of Nakhunte and the identification of the geographical fea- 
tures and names mentioned therein. 

The Bak tribes though under the general command of one chief, were 
divided into several branches which did not reach China at tlie same 
time, as shown by tho contemporaneity of several chiefs, and tlieir re- 
lations with the tribes of Northern Tibet among whom matriarchatc was 
the rule 10. 

Nakhunte (Nai Hwangti) having reached N. W. China did not go 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 5 

furtlior than westward of the southern bent of the Yellow river, and 
dies to be buried, says the traditional legend, at Ning on the borders 
of the present Kansuh and Shensi.^^ 

During their advance towards the east, some of the Bak tribes must 
have separated from the whole body, and travelled northwards near the 
upper course of the Yonissei, where inscriptions apparently in the writing 
of the time have been found ^-; but we must expect some more exact 
copies than those we hitherto possess. 

Sieh, the official scribe and officer of the Divine Shun, at the beg- 
inning of the Shu King, was a descendant from the tribes of the West, 
and an ancestor of the Shang dynasty. ^^ 

It is the opinion of some native scholars, that their writing was in- 
vented elsewhere, not in China, but in the west.^'* On the other hand 
it has been attempted to show that the symbol for tcest occupies a 
prominent place in the writing. ^'^ Whatever may be the value of this 
proof which I am not ready to support, the western origin of the 
Chinese writing rests now on a sounder t)asis than any of these views. 
There are however in the ancient Chinese traditions several allusions 
which point in so precise a manner to the cuneiform writing, that 
we must mention them here, Shen-nung=Sargon was reputed to have 
used signs like tongues of fire to record facts, at a time when the an- 
cestors of the Chinese were not yet acquftinted with the art of writing, 
and Dnnkit (modern Tsang hieh) whose name has the same meaning 
as that of the Chaldean Dungi of which it was a rendering and under 
whom the Bak tribes were taught to write, made marks on clay like 
claws of birds and animals. The primitive writing was also compared 
to drops of rain finely drawn out and freezing as they fall.^^ It is 
difficult to mistake in all this, most distinct descriptions of the cun- 
eiform writing of south-western Asia. We shall speak again of the 
peculiarity of the old Chinese writing further on, but then on doc- 
umental evidence- 
Routine has been for so long the rule in Chinese studies, in imitation of 
the Chinese habits, that anything done in despite of this time-honoured 
and most convenient method is by many looked upon with suspicion, as 
unworthy of attention, uncalled for and revolutionary. The contempt for 
independent investigations, shown by the generality of those, who residing 
for a time among the Chinese, have acquired there a large dose of their 
routine and soma tincture of Chinese knowledge and language has produced 
this most hindering effect. For instance, however difficult to believe it 



I 



6 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

may appear to the non-initiated, it is a fact that modern books are written 
by soi-disant authorities on Chinese matters, where Chinese chronology is 
given rts genuine and trustworthy, though its fictitiousness for ancient 
times has been exploded since the last century by European scholars. It 
was proved to have been calculated backwards upon false astronomical data, 
imaginary periods and fictive epochs. '^^ The application of the well-known 
cycle of sixty to computation of historic events was only made in 104 B.C. 
by Szema Tsien, the author of She-ki. As a matter of fact the ancient 
Chinese had no more chronology than any other of the ancient nations. 
Dates and times were jomputed by the lengths of reigns, or the number 
of year3 elapsed of such a reign, or between such and such an event 
of great notoriety .^^ Unhappily there are some discrepancies between the 
amounts of the respective lengths of reigns, previously to 846 b.c, 
a date on which the various authorities agree. These discrepancies 
amount to three centuries or there about, makiiig the calculations of 
the dates of Yao vary from the XXIst to the XXIVth century and 
those of Nai Hwang ti from the XXIVth to the XXVIIth century b.c. 
The chronology generally received among the Chinese placing Hwangti 
in 2G97 b.c. is a work of the Xlth century a.d, based upon the false 
basis we have spoken of. 

Therefore other sources must be referred to for ascertaining the general 
outlines of the chronology in ancient times. These we find in computations 
and statements made by ancient writers and in a few astronomical data, 
which, however vague, are not without importance. The times of Hwangti 
and his successors, Yao and Shun among others, were followed by the 
dynasties of Hia, Shang, and Tchou, during which last Confucius flourished 
(li.c. 551-479). Various statements of Yu Hung (circa b.c. 1100) 
Wang-sun Mwan (b.c. 606) and Mengtze (b.c. 372-289) permit to refer 
the period of Yao and Shun to circa 2100 b.c. The different astronomical 
data in the first chapter of the Shu-king^^ and in the calendar of the Hia 
dynasty are applicable to the same epoch.^o 

Now Hwang-p'u Mi, a celebrated scholar^^of the third century (a.d. 215- 
282) called the "book debauchee" from his ardour in study, who had 
specially examined the historical traditions independently of any astro- 
nomical speculations, has come to the conclusion that Nai Hwangti's date 
Avas a year which corresponds to our 2332 B.C. This figure, which cannot 
be far from the truth, is one of the links of my identification of the 
Chinese Nakhunte of Elamite=Nai Hwangti with the Kudur Nakhunte 
of Elaniite history. On the other hand, in removing an obvious in- 



i 



^ 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 7 

terpolatiou in the mytliical list of kings preserved in ancient China, 
the date of Shen-nung, Chinese form of Sargon, agrees with the 3800 
B.C. indicated for this ruler in the cuneiform documents-^, 
pvjt appears from all the comparative evidence and the break in the 
traditions and social connection that it is in the XXIIlrd century 
B.C. that the Bak tribes, future civilise rs of China, branched off from 
i the vicinity of Elam and Babylonia, and migrated eastwards. \ 

Notes. 7) For a sketch of this important fact of history, cfr. my work The 
LcuKjuages of China before the Chinese (London, 1887), §§ 13 — 19 and 
187—201; edition fran^aise, pp. 7-10, 109-126, and 146-U8. 

8) Among the most important let us quote: — Dr. Wells Williams, The -^ 
Middle^ Kingdom, vol. II, p. 144; Prof. James Legge (Introduction" 
Chinese Classics, vol. Ill, p, 189); Dr. J. Edkins, China's jdace in 
Phi I ologi/ (London, 1871); Dr. J. Chalmers, The origin of the Chinese 
(London, 1868); Prof. R. K. Douglas, The Language and Literature 
of China (London, 1875); China in the Encyclopaedia Britannica; 
China (London, 1882); Baron F. von Richtofen, the well-known 
geographer of China, ni the first volume of his great wta-k, China, 
Ergebnisse eigener Eeiseii und darauf gegrilndeter Studien, pp. 48, 317, 
319, 422-425, and 428, who has been able to trace back the Chinese 
westward as far as the Tarym basin, Chinese Turkestan. 

9) The Chinese Mythical Kings and the Babylonian Canon (The Academy, 
Oct, 6, 1883). This is developed in a special monograph, still in MS. 

10) The Tree of Life and the Ccdendar Plant, p. 6 [^B. ^- 0. R. II, p. 153). 
Also developed in a monograph, still in MS. 

lV)The Languages of China before Ihe Chinese, ^ 13, n. 

12) Ibid., n. 1, Prof, J. R. Aspelin, of Helsinfors, is now engaged in a 
regular study of these and other inscriptions of Siberia, as he has kindly 
informed me. 

13) Cfr. Shu-King II, i, 17-19; Shih King IV, iii, od. 3 and 4; K'ang hi v/ 
tze tien, s. v. 37 + 6, f. 17. 

14) J. Chalmers, The Origm, p. 23, quoting the Shicoh loen. 

15) Deka, The Origin of the Chinese, pp. 152-154, of Notes and Queries 
on China and Japan, vol. I, (Hong-Kong, 1867) ; Hie, Analysis of 
Chinese Characters {^The Chiiiese Recorder^, 1871, pp. 90-93, and 
119-123). 

16) All the texts are referred to in The Old Babylo7iian Characters and 
their Chinese Derivates, pp, 12-13 and 26 {B. (J- 0. R. II, pp. 34-35 
and 97). 

17) Cfr. P, Souciet, Observations 3Iatheniatiques, Astronomiques, &c.; 
Paris' 1729-1732; vol. I, p. 6, vol. II, pp. 2, 9. 

18) Cfr. J. Legge, Chinese Classics, vol. V, p. 101. — T. de L. Traditions 
of Babylonia in Ancient Chinese Documents, s. f. 

19) Dr. G. Schlegel, in his important work, Uranographie chinoise 
(La Haye, 1876, 929 pp.), and Reponse aux critiques (La Haye, 1880, 
23 pp. J where he claims an antiquity of 16,108 years B.C. for the astro- 
nomy he describes (a part of which may, I think, have been carried to 



> 



I 



8 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

China from the West) has started from the famous statement of Yao to 
his four astronomers reported (perhaps inexactly) in the first chapter of 
the Sha-king). Now the learned Professor has understood this state- 
ment as implying some peculiarities which may require the length of 
time he has calculated, but wliich are not of absolute necessity for the 
intelligence of the text. Other scholars have understood it differently, 
and are satisfied that about 2000 b.c. the statement of Yao was not far 
from truth. Cfr. the following note. 

20) Cfr. Discussion of Astronomical Records in ancient Chinese Boohs, by 
Prof. S. M. Russell (Journal, Peking Oriental Society, Peking 1888, 
vol. II, pp. 187-200); Notes on an ancient Chinese Caleular, ])p. 1-7, 
by E. C. Knobel, Hon. Sec. Royal Astronomical Society, Loudon, 1882; 
EarJji Chinese Texts, The Calendar of the Hea Di/nastij, by Prof. R. K. 
Douglas, pp. 1-60; Orientalia Antiqua, edit. T. de L., London, 1882, 
vol. I): Chart of the principtil Stars chiefly Zodiacal, &c., by Prof. C. 
Pritchard, of Oxford (Sacred Books of the East, vol. Ill, p. '11); 
Astrojiomy of the Ancient Chinese, pp. 00-102 by Dr. J. Chalmers, 
(Legge's Chinese Classics, vol. III.) — Also, T. de L., Introduction 
to Historical Catalogue of Chinese Money (London, 1889). 

21) W. F. Mayers, Chinese readers Manual, I. 215. 

22) Traditions of Babylonia in ancient Chinese documents, s. f. 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 



TV. Elements of cultore received by the civilisers of China from 
Babylonia and Elam. 

The remains and loans of Chaldean culture, ^Yhicll we can still now 
discover in the early Chinese civilization, are so numerous and hear 
on so many points, that we cannot without difificulty suumiarize them with 
clearness; their number increases with the progress of research, and not a 
few will remain behind. For the sake of convenience we shall enumerate 
them in their relation to: o) Sciences and arts; b) Writing and Literature; -^ 
e) Institutions, Government, and Eeligion ; d) Historical traditions and 
Legends; reserving for a special chapter those which show that the source of 
all these loans was in Elam=Susiana. 

a) Sciences and Arts. ^^ 

The ancient Chinese, through their civilisers, had learned from Chaldeans. ( 

the solar year, 

its duodenary division, with the system of an intercalary month, 

its sub-division into twenty-four parts, 

and into periods of five days ; 

also the division of the day into double hours, 

and a certain use of a period of seven days.^^ 
They preserved from their early teachers 

the same fourfold division of the year into seasons ;26 

and they had not entirely forgotten tlie symbolism of the names of 
the twelve months.^' 

221i 




10 , ORIGIN OF THE KARLY 

Nor had they forgotten 

the aUusions in the names of the planets^^ 
and their symbolical colours^^ 

the special colours affected to the points of space ; 
the superstitions relative to the lucky and unlucky days;^*^ 
the Babylonian words for lucky and unlucky^^ and other superstitions;^* 
the hidden properties and harmonies of numbers ;^^ 
a ruling idea in the repetition of events after every period of 12 
years f* 

the practice of divination, ^^ 

and the use of eight wands of fate like those in the hand of Marduk;^* 
the conception of Tin and Tang, principles derived or diverged from 
the Babylonian Anu and Anat f'^ 

the sacredness and mysterious value of personal names ; &c.^^ 
It is also to them that must be traced back 

their ancient knowledge of 24 stellar points^^ afterwards increased to 
28 at the beginning of the Tchou dynasty ;**^ 

many names of stars such as those of the Pleiades and Polar star; 
the Babylonian standard measures and weights such as the heavy niina,*^ 
the twelve scales of music ;*2 
the gnomon''^ ; the clepsydra, &c. ; 

their cycle of ten, the names of which are obvious corruptions of 
the ten Akkadian numerals ;'*4 

the cycle of twelve, of which the full names, preserved from antiquity 
in the Erli-ya and the She-lci, stand in^the same plight with reference to 
the names of the twelve Babylonian months ;^^ 
the notion of a cycle of twelve years \^^ 

the knowledge of the astronomical period of nineteen years, that which 
was supposed to have been discovered by the Greek Meton In wx. 432, 
but which existed in China long before that time, and in Chaldea much 
earlier still ;47 

the use of periods of 432 and 72 in their calculations,^^ 
and that of 60 as a cycle and a divisible unit;^^ 
the decimal notation and local value of the figures ;^^ 
the use of some astronomical instruments, such as one for observing 
the meridian passage of stars, so as to iix the time of the four seasons 
of the year ;^^ 

ihe conception of the sky as a convex vault f^ 

many terms from the Babylonian vocabulary of civilisation, Akkadian 
and Semitic, 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. H 

such as those for the great year,^^ 
and for the intercalary iiionth,^* &c; 

the motion tliat the full lensjth of human life oa<;-ht to lie 120 voars,-'^ 
the shifted cardinal points ; &c. 
The latter was the occasion of 

the most remarkable of the confirmatory evidences of the genuineness of 
my disclosures: it came from the decipherment of cuneiform inscriptions 
in February 1883. Three years previously, in May 1880, I had been 
able to state from my investigation of the Chinese documents, that the 
early Chinese names of the four cardinal points and the symbols to 
write them, were much like those of Chaldea, with the difference that 
they displayed a shifting of the quarter of the circle.^^ My statement, 
based chiefly on Chinese evidence, was splendidly confirmed at the later 
time at the date quoted above by the decipherment of a Babylonian 
tablet,^" since then confirmed by several others, where it was shown that 
the Akkadian orientation was leaning to the West, their north being 
the north-west and so forth.^^ 
In arts the ancient Chinese owed to their early civilisers : 

th3 art of making fire by gyration^s (fire-drill) in contradistinction to 
fire by friction-aloug so well-known in the East'^'^ ; 

the arts of clay-brick building in substitution for stone ;''^ 

of making canals, 

of embanking rivers, and of works of irrigation 

and agricultural pursuits, to which they applied themselves as soon as 
settled in their new country, with a determination of purpose which dis- 
plays an experience and knowledge of long standing ;63 

the culture of the wheat which was indigenous only in the N. and 
N. E. of the Persian Gulf and which they carried away with them^^ . i^^2 (.(^ij 

the use of metals and the arts of casting them^^ ; 

the erection of lofty terraces for astronomical purposes, 

and of large square altars f^ 

the extensive use of personal seals ;^^ 

the use of war chariots 

and of harnessing horses abreast;^' 

the use of special emblems on their ruler's dress ;^^ 

the making of coracles or skin-boats^^ and many others. 

Notes. 23) Cfr. for the statements about Chalda'a: A.H. Sayce, Bah/Ionian 
Lite? at are, pp. 54-55; The Astro7iomy and Astrology of the Babylort.ians, 



12 ORIGIN <iF TH.; EARLY 

pass. (Trans. Snc. Bibl. ArcluTol., vol. Ill, 1874). 
24") On tlie 24 tHeh ki dr. Wells Williams, S/iUahic Dirtiiman/. p. 974: 

on the 12 tchen (J. Doolittle, Vocabulary and Handbook, t. II, p. 669: 

J. Fcrgnsson, Chinese researches, p. 165. 
25) P. Porter Smith, A Chinese Sabbath ( Notes and Queries on Cliina 

and Japan, vol IV, p. 15) ; C. D., A Chinese Sabbath, ibid. p. 38) ; 

A. Wylie, On the hioitledge of a weekly Sabbath in China (The Chinese 

Recorder and Missionary Journal, vol. IV, Poochow, 1871. pp. 4-9 and 

40-45j cfr. especially p. 44 h. 
26 J This had been already guessed by Portia d'Urban, Hlstoire Ant. de la 

Chine, vol. 11, p. 85; Pergusson, Chinese Chronologf/, p. 170: cfr. p. 136. 

27) Cfr. Sayce, llie Astronomy, p. 162, and R. K. Douglas. Babylonian 
and Chinese literature, p. 8; China, p. 232. 

28) Cfr. Sayco, Astron. and A^trol., pp p, 167-175. — E. K. Douglas, 
Bab. and Chin. Lit., p. 7; China, p. 3. 

29) Cfr. J. Chalmers, Grig. Chin., p, 25. 

30) 8aYce, op cit.; N. B. Dennys, The folk-lore of China, (Kong-kong, 
1876) pp. 27-32. 

31) Early hist. Chin. ciriL, p. 25; Old. Book Chin., p. 262. 

32) R. K. Douglas, op. cit. 

35) P. W. Mayers: Chinese Mender's Manual, p. XL 

34) Tcheou-li.'XXVI, 23, trad. Biot, vol. II, p. I15.--Sayce, Astrownn. 
and Astrol., p. 151. 

35) Shu-kimj. Ta Yu mo, II, (2) IS. 

36) Early history of the Chinese cirilit^ation, jip. 29-30: Beginnings of 
writing around 'Tibet, § 28. 

37j Cfr. PrauQois Lenormant, Les orlgines de Vhistoire, vol. I. p, 494. 

38) A. H. Sayce, Lectures on the religion of the ancient Bc(b>/lonians, 
pp. 304-305. 

39) On these points in Babylonia, cfr. A. H. Sayce, Astron. and Astral,. 
p. 176. 

40) J. B. Biot, Etudes sur I'dstronomie Indienne et Ch'moise (Paris, 1862 
p. 247. — I think most probable that the systematisation of tlie 24 stellar 
points of antiquity into the 28 siu was the work of the founders of the 
Tchou dynasty in imitation of what they had learned from tlie astronomy 
of Kwarism, where, according to Albiruni's statement, great progress had 
been made in that science since 1304 B.C., and among others the 
liarmonization of the solar and lunar cycles. 

41) Babylo i{<(n and old Chinese measures (The Academy, Oct. 10. 1885). 
243-244. 

42) This has been pointed out repeatedly bv seveial writers on the subject . 

43) Tchou-li, k. 9, ff. 16, 17, 22; k. 20. {."40: k. 33, f. 60; k. 42. f.' 19: 
k: 43, f, 20. 

44) llie uffinitii of the ten stems of the Chinese cycle ivith the Akkad an 
numerals (The Academy, Sept. 1, 1888 • . 

45) Babylonian cycles, numbers, and names in ancient China (t-till in IMS.) 
For instance cfr. Chinese Shept'-=.Shebat Babyl. 

„ Taniot=i Tamils ,. 

Tcb-tu = Tebit 
„ Tihfan-noh-=.Si-va-nu „ &c. Several of 

the other names are Akkadian. 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 13 

46) The great year of the Cliiuese. — A. H. Sayue, Antron. cnul Astral 
p. 151. 

47) J. Legge, Chinetie Ciai<sirs, vdI. I, iutrocl., j). ^2. — A. II. Sajce, 
Ai^tron. and AstroL, ]>. 216. 

48)Cfr. F'ergusson, Chin. CJiron. CycL, pp. 82-8G; cfr. also p]i. IQjj lOo 
and 130. 

49) All this is demonstrated in the monograph above quoted. 

50) Cfr. TIk' old itnmeraU, the counting rods, and the Swan pan in China, 
p. 312 (.The Xiimisuuitic Chronicle, 1883, a'oI. Ill, i)p. 297-310j.-- 
Dr. J. Edkins, who does not seem to have known the latter paper of 
mine, wrote Zoro^ rahie in Chinese arithmetical notation (Joiiinul of 
the Peking Oriental Society, 188G, vol. I, pp. 160-1(59;, where he 
claims a Babylonian origin foran <jld Chinese notation suiiposed tobe from 
left to right; but I have shown in the above paper with the help of the 
ancient coins {ihid., p. 315) that this notation was from right to left; 
besides, the writer did not know that at the tniie of the transmission of 
writing to the civilisers of China, the characters were arranged from to]> 
to bottom. 

51) Shu-king II, i. 3. — J. Edkins, Science and Art in China to the 
Ming di/nasti/ (^Journ. Peking Or. Soc, 1888, vol. II, p. li'J). 

52) Francois Lenormant, Chaldean Magic^ p. 152.— Alex, Wylie. 

53) Cfr. Old Chinese .<;»/ (modern 6' ;(//) and the Assyro-Babyloniau sa^^i/. 

54) The Akkadian words or their cognates which are found in the Chinese ^O- ^V> Cs^^ L 
vocabulary may be arranged in three series: 1) those received at the 3'^ ^jt-TjijUa., 
beginning with the civilisation in which they were current terms; 2) 

those which were the common inheritance of the two languages from 

the remote and original stock Turano-Scythian to which both of them ^ 

belonged, and from which they have separately and greatly diverged. 

On this divergence cfr. for the Akkadian : T. de L., Akl-adian cmd 

Sumerian in conqiaratire Philologij (B. & 0. R., I, 1-7) ; and for the 

Chinese: The Languages of China before the Chinese, sec. 20-26. 

55) Tso-tchuen. Hi kung, 32nd year. ' 

56) Journal of the Society of Arts, 1880, vol. XXVIIT, p. 733.— T. de ^ 
L., Earlii historfi of the Chinese civilisation (London, 1880), p. 29. 

57) By M. Theo. G. Pinches, in the Proceedings of the Society of Biblical 
Archeology, Feb. 5, 1883, p. 74. 

58) Since then I have written a monograph on the subject with the addition ._ 
of new evidence from the Cliinese sources 17ie shifted cardinal points 
from Elam to early China, of which the first part has appeared in the 

- B. & 0. R. II, pp. 25-32. 

59) W. St. Chad Boscawen, The pre-historic civilisation of Babylonia 
(Journal Anthropological Institute, 1879, vol. VIII, pp. 21-36. 

60) Oscar Peschel, Races of Man, p. 140; Ch. Letourneau, La Sociologie, 
p. 538. — For instance the gtsub in Tibet (Jaeschke, Tibetan English 
Dictionary, p. 433) not quoted in these works. 

61) A peculiar fact is that the Chinese and their kindreds of Tibet are the 3^2,((.0 
only ones in the East who build liouses in bricks, and that everywhere; 

so much so that their quarter in a foreign town is always recognisable, 
by that feature. 

62) Wheat carried from Mesopotaviia to Early China, p. 1 (B. §• 0. R., 
II, 134). — cfr. R. K. Douglas, China, p, 5. 



14 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

62) Wkmt carried, <&€., ibid. pp. 184-191; and the letter of Prof. Alph. 
de CandoUe, The wheat indigenous in Mesopotamia, ibid. p. 266. 
3 V^ C43) 64) The sole traces of the stone period of civilisation belong to the un- 
civilised populations of the country when the Chinese came successively 
• in contact witli them. There is no souvenir of such a state among the 
Chinese traditions. Metals are mentioned since their beginning, and 
the casting of vases with maps and figures is spoken of under the great 
Yu, with all the appearances of truth. Cfr. J. Legge, Chinese Classics, 
vol. Ill, p. 421, vol. V, p. 293. M. Aspelin has pointed out a probable 
influence of Assyro-Babylonia on the bronze art of Siberia. Cfr. J. J. 
A. Worsae, Dds ages de pierre et de bronze dans Vanclen et le noiweau 
monde, p. i06 (Memoires de la Societe des antiquaires du Nord, 1880. 
— Cfr. also: Virchow, Trans- Kaukarische and Bahylonisch-Assyrische 
Alterthilmer aus A ntimon, Kupfer and Bronze (Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie, 
1887, IV, 334-337). 

65) J. Edkins, China's place, pp. 3-5, 

66) This feature is too well known to require any demonstration. 

67) J. Edkins, Chi i a' s place : "at present in N. China horses are not 
harnessed abreast. The farther we go back, the nearer are the re- 
semblances (with Western Asia)," p. 7. 

68) Shu-King yih and Isih II, 4. 4.-This item will be specially noticed 
in a future paper, 

69) Cfr. the Cliinese authorities in G. Schlegel's Uranographie Chinoise, 
p. 347. — On the Kufas cfr. Heroilotus, I, 194, Ker Porter, Layard, 
Chesney, in G. Rawlinson's Herodotus, vol. I, p. 318 ; W. F. Ains- 
worth, The Euphrates expedition, vol. II, p. 196. 

/;) Writing and Literature. 
As the best sign of civilisation nnd the great vehicle of knowledge, 
Writing deserves more attention than any of the items we have hitherto 
enumerated. 

^ The Bale tribes future civilisers of China, on the border lands of Sus- 
ana, at the times of Dungi King of Ur, (as shewn by their own 
traditions)^*^ and of Gudea Priest King of Sirpulla-Lagash, learned the 
art of writing as spread from Babylonia, ^^ and afterwards they carried 
away with them eastwards this knowledge, with many other elements 
of the Chaldean cialture.^ 

When on clay as was most always the case, this writing was made 
of cuneiform strokes (like claws of birds, say the Chinese) the shape 
of which was owed to the implement used to impress them ; when 
engraved on stone, the big apex of the strokes was not yet developed, as 
it came to be later on, in more complete imitation of the clay writing.''^ 

The Bak-s, instead of baked clay''* tablets and cylinders, were compelled 
by their natural surroundings and by the unsteadiness of their settle- 
ments to make use of slips of bamboo bark, on which they cut incuse the 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 16 

signs of the writing with a graving-knife^^; and tliough this inatorial 
obliged them to write in more roundish shapes, they preserved as mnch as 
\possible the system of making strokes thick at one end and thin at the 
\other. This peculiarity, which is a most salient feature of the specimens 
of tlie oldest Chinese writing or Ku-toen preserved to tliis day, and also 
called Ko-tii'^. 

The forms of the Babylonian characters, not drawn in obedience to strict 
rules as it became the case later on in Assyria, were far removed from a 
pictorial stage^^. Some of them, however, still preserved traces of hiero- 
glyphical antecedents generally facing the reader in contradistinction to 
the Egyptian and Hit.ite hieroglyphs, which were generally drawn in 
profile''^. Tiiis feature was preserved in their derivates, and the Chinese, 
far from forgetting this small pictorial side of their written characters* 
have enlarged upnn it, notably in 820 b.c.'^^, and have never been able to 
improve and advance their writing out of the limbo of ideographism and 
imperfect phonetism, in which it was lingering when they learnt it. 

They have preserved as well the other various characteristics of the 
Chaldeo-Elamite antecedent of their writing at the times of Dungi and 
Gudea,^o such as the disposition of the characters in vertical columns 
and then from right to left, their meanings and not a few of their phon- 
etic and polyphonic values, their imperfect systen of aerology and phon- 
etism. their limited use of determinative ideograms which they increased 
afterwards, and several other important peculiarities.^^ 

A few hundred form the basis of this writing in the Chinese derivate 
as in its Babylonian antecedent. About three hundred^^ archaic forms 
are now known from the Babylonian side, out of which two hundred 
are pretty well ascertained in their respective meaning, 
r There are also a few peculiarities which must be noticed as not un- 
important. The early Chinese writing has no simple symbol for river, 
but it possessed peculiarly shaped signs for a boat, for wind (an inflated 
sail); all characteristics of the Babj'lonian "script. In the oldest texts the 
character shan 'mountain' is used for country as in the cuneiform texts,ji 

The identifications with the primitive Chinese, their derivates, bear 
already on nearly every one of these 200.^^ 

The identifications hitherto published are much more important 
than their numbers would suggest, because they do not bear on such 
symbols as those which in the case of writing derived from hiero- 
glyphics may be drawn in a similar fashion, as for instance the water, 
the sun, the crescent of the moon,^* &c., they bear on the contrary 



16 ORIGIN OP THE KARLY 

on signs wliich are most arbitrary in their form, and could not be twice 
tlrawn in the same way. There is no doubt that the early Chinese char- 
acters,^^ branched off as they were from the ancient Babylonian writing, 
and carefully ^treserved in the same traditional surroundings since forty 
centuries, however fragmentary and altered this tradition may be in the 
present day, contain a large number of valuable data which will prove 
useful to the Assyriologist-paleographs, when they appreciate their source 
i)f information. Some proofs have already been given in support of 
this statement. ^'^ 

With respect to Li terature, we have the following entiy to make. 

A critical examination of the text, and a partial restoration of some 
parts of the Yu-kiny has led me to the conclusion, that the basis of 
that remarkable and most unintelligible among sacred books, consisted 
'of old fragments of early times in China, mostly of a lexical char- 
acter ;^^ the primitive meaning of them became lost, and they were 
afterwards adapted, through the changes in the writing and graphical 
interpretations, to other purposes. ^^ Many of these changes and sub- 
stitutions of characters are well known. The original lists are so much 
like the so-called syllabaries of Chaldea, and in some cases the identity 
is so close, that it is impossible not to believe that their authors 
were acquainted either themselves or by tradition with these syllabaries, 
and that the questitn arises whether some of these were not actually 
carried in China by the leaders of the Bak tribes civilisers of the country. **'' 

The similarity under that respect was not confined to phonetic lists 
like those of the Yoking; in China as in Chaldea they were acquainted 
with tlie system of vocabularies^'' arranged by classes of objects. ^^ 

Notes. 70) Cf. xupm, part II. 

71) Chips of Bnhijlunian anfJ Chinese paloengraph/, III. 
■/ 72) Cfr. notably 'The old Babjilonian characters and their Chinese deri- 
rates, London LS88; (B. et 0, R., pp. 73-09): Chip^ of Bahnlonian and 
Chinese paUcographi/, (B. & 0. R., pp. 257-263, to be continued). — 
Prof. A. H. Sayce, Bah)/loni n ajid Chinese characters (Nature, June 7, 
1888 and B. 0. R. II, 218-220), accepting for Assyriology my discf)very. 
Prof. R, K. Douglas had accepted it for Sinology long before. Cfr. his 
papers at note supra. 

73) Cfr. the facsimile of the stone and clay inscriptions in L. de Sarzec, 
Dt'cDurertes en Chaldee, i)art I. and II. 

7-4) Tlie clay tablets and cylinders were baked afterwards, in Assyria only. 

75) Old Bab. char, and Chin, derlv., pp. 20 and 25. 

76) Now K\)h tou, transcribed with two synibols meaning ideographically 
" tadpoles," because of the analogy of sliape of the latter with tliat of the 
strokes. This is a play on the name which, formerly transcribeil "grain- 
measures," was so altered in the second century b.c. by King Ngan- 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 17 

Kwoh. The name was probably the original one of tlie writing. A further 
resemblance has been sought for by later counnentators between the wa- 
ving of the tadpole's tail and the appearance of the strokes of charac- 
ters eaten up and worn out on ancient inscriptions, such .is the Inscrip- 
tion of Yii. which is, however, a forgery made about a few centuries 
from the Clu'istian era. The Ku-iocn characters are those of high 
ant'quity, with which has been written tlie oldest of the canonical books; 
other characters of the same style and period which were used in other 
works are called Ku-wen-ki-tze in contradistinction to the former. All 
the Kii-icen and Ki-tze characters known to-day have been preserved 
from the monuments and traditional copies of the original works by the 
Chinese palaeographers of whom the works, collections of inscriptions, 
comparative dictionaries and others, are almost in every case done with 
a precision .md care worthy of European science. The mere list would 
be a long one ; a few only of the most valuable may be quoted here : such 
as the Lull shu t'ung of Min Tsi-kih, 10 bks. 1661 (which must not be 
mistaken for an inferior production of nearly the same title by Yang 
Hlien, of the Yuen dynasty); Luh shu fun luy by Fu Lwan-siang, 12 
bks in 1751; Tchiien tze wei by Tung Wei-fu in 1691; Ku-wen Ki-tze 
by Tchu Mou-wei in 1612; and others quoted in my paper on The old 
Babfilonian characters, &c., sec. 8. The work of the palaeographers has 
been much easier and mi)re certain ia their identifications by the 
preservation of a large number of ancient inscriptions, which permitted 
the verification of the calligraphical exactitude of the Archaic characters 
transmitted througli manuscript tradition. On the other hand the text 
of the canonical books have been engraved in several instances, notably 
under the Han, T'ang, Sung and actual dynasties, and in several styles 
of writing, the original Ku-wen text among others in the beginning 
(cfr. P'ang Yung-mei's Shih king k\io wen ti yao). In a.d. 175 Tsai- 
yung, on the command of Ling-ti of the Eastern Han dynasty, engraved 
on stone tablets, eight feet high, on the two sides tlie five classics : Yh 
King, She King, Shu King, Li Ki and Tchnn tsiu, in three styles of 
writing (cfr. Hou Han Shu, biogr. of Tsai-yung ; Tai ping yii Ian, 
Bk.589, f. 2). During the years 240-249, Ti Wang fang of the Wei 
dynasty had them repaired. In 518 the remaining tablets, 46 in number, 
were employed in the building of a Buddhist temple; but they were 
rescued by special order of the Emperor, and 35 tablets found unbroken 
were placed in the Kwoh tze tang or University. These tablets contained 
the texts of the Shu King and of the Tchun tsiu. At the time of 
the autlior of the Si tcheng Ki (a work quoted in the Tai ping yii Ian 
of 983 AD. Bk. 589, f. 7), eighteen tablets only were still in exis- 
tence. About the year 1050, under the Sung dynasty, Sli-wang was 
enabled to take squeezes of the inscriptions and engrave 818 char- 
acters which Sun Sing-yen has published in fac-simile in his work 
Wei san ti shih king y tze Vao. On this matter cfr. also the Li suh 
of Hung Kwoh published in 1188. We know that the text Ku- 
wen of the Yh-King was once in Panthier's library. The text 
tchucn of the Yh-King, Shu King, She King, Tchun Tsiu, Tchou-li 
and y-li exists in the Bibliotheque Nationale Fonds Chinois, No. 183, 
Paris. 

77) Old Bah. char, and Chin, der., sec. 11. 

78) The oldest Book of the Chinese, sec. 111; Early history of the Chinese 
civilization, p. 22. 




< 



18 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

79) On this remarkable revival of ideographism, cfr. Early history, pp. 
15-17; The oldest Book of the Chinese, sec. 24. 

80) The great advance I have made in my disclosures, besides the multi- 
plication of proofs, bear on the derivation of the written characters 
by the pre-Chinese Bak tribes, and on tlie Iiistorical certainty of tlie fact. 
They are not so much the result of my own efforts as the outcome of 
the progress of knowledge. In my first publication, when I felt a ^lid 
ground under my feet. Early history of the Chinese civilisation (1880), 
I could only claim a communitj^f oi'igin and a probable derivation 
from the Akkado-Chalda>an (pj). 22 and y>2). In The oldest Book of 
the Chinese, seen 10 (2nd parD, April, I88;3), I was still claiming 
for the writing of the Pre-Chinese Bak tribes a derivation from the pre- 
cuneifurm characters, and I endeavoured from an examination of the 
early Chinese characters to discover some particularities of this antecedent 
or pre-cuneiform writing (ibid., sec. ill). But in Nov. of the same year 
I could point out that the derivation had taken place from the archaic 
cuneif .rm and not from the pre-cuneiform characters (Traditions of 
Babylonia, p. 3). Since then the matter has received confirmatory 
evidences, direct and circumstantial, from uU sides and is now definitively 
settled. 

81) Old Bahyl. Char., j.art III. 

82_) Cfr. A. Amiaud et L. Mochineau; Tableau compare des ccritureis 
Sabylonienne et Assyricnne archaiques et inodernes, avec classement des 
327 signes d'apres leur forme archaique. Paris, 1887. 

83) On these 200, fifty and odds have already been published; the others 
will follow as soon as leisure an 1 liealth ])ermit. — The old Bah. char, and 
their Chinese der., part IV; Chips of Bah. and Chin, palveoy., pass. ; 
The Tree of life and the Calendar plant of Babylonia and China, 
n. 38, p. 10; Wheat carried front Mesopotamia to early China, ]), 5/ 
Early hist, of the Chin, civil., \>. 23 and plate, &o. 

84) This argument, however, is not very good, as simple objects of nature 
are often represented differently. Cfr. the remarks and plates in Adolphe 
d'Assier, Ess<(i tie Grammaire Gi'nerale (Paris, 1872). 

85) I have explained how and by what means these ancient characters 
have been preserved, in Les lanc/ues de la Chine avant les Chinois 
(Paris, 1888), pp. 176-177; some l)ihIiographical references are given in 
The old. Bab. char. &c., pp. 4-5. Sec also note 76 sv^/'/vV. 

86) Cfr. The oldest Book of the Chinese, sec. 115. 

87) T. de L., Early history, pp. 23-26; The Yh King (The Athenajum, 
21 Jan. 9 and 30 Sept.,' 1882; The oldest Book of the Chinese and its 
Authors, in Journal oj'tlie Royal Asiatic Society, 1882, vol. XIV, pp. 
237-289 and 484. — Rob. K. Douglas, The progress of Chinese 
linguistic discovery in The Times April 20. 1880, reprinted in Triibner's 
Orient td Literary Record, vol. I, pp. 125-127; Chinese and Babylonian 
Literature, in Quarterly Revietr of July 1882; two letters in I'he Academy 
Julv 12, 1882, pp. 121-122, and Oct. 7. same year: China (London, 
8vo, 1882), pp. 358-359, 2nd edit. 1887, pp. 391-392.- Clement 
F. R. Allen, The Chinese book of the Odes, in J. R. A. S., 1884, vol. 
XVI., p. 460. — Stanley Lane Poole, Sacred books of the Chinese, in 
Saturday Review, 30 June, 1883. — Ch.de Harlez, I^ete.rte originaire de 

Y'h King, sa nature et son interpretation, in Jonrnal Aslatiqne de 1887, 
reprint pp. 6-7. 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 19 

88) Dr. I)e Harlez, studying the ancient text as it became after all these 
changes, has recognized in it an attempt at grouping under eacii wdrd 
an enumeration of the ideas proper to the Ciiinese philosophy. Cfr. 
his remarkable paper, Le texte originaire du Yh-Kiiu/, o.c. 

89) Cfr., for instance, the comparison made § 115 of my paper The 
Oldest Book of the Chinese ^ I.e. 

90) Cfr. § 117, ibid. 

91) I must mention here the suggestion (Ferguson, Chinese UeseTchea 
p. 74) that the SJian hal King the Classic of the Mountains and Seas, 
contains a translation of the ancient work of Berosus, though it is devoid 
of any foundation and must have come from some one wlio had never 
read the book itself. As I have paid some attention to this work, 
which I have seen no where faithfully described, I may as well state 
that it is composed of six different works succi'Ssively incorporated and 
forming now 18 bucks. The first five, Wu tsi<oig, are the older part 
in which .short interpolations only have been made ; it is a geographi- 
cal descripti(m of the hills and mountains of the country known under 
the Sliang Tynasty. The Hai wai and Hai nei forming the 6-9 and 
10-18 books respectively are two separate works describing maps of ^ 
Romantic geography written under the Tchou Tynasty and added as a 
continuation of the former work by the edjtor Lia-h.anq in b.c. 80-9. 
Lhi-si'i\i\\o died in 57 a.d. arranged Another edition of the work with 
the addition of the Ta huang Bks. 11-17, and of the Ilai nei Bk. 18, 
two compositions of similar character as the two proceeding, but still 
more romantic, if possible. Finally Kwoh-poh the celebrated com- 
mentator of the Illrd. century, inserted the Shui King a small com- 
position of the Ts'in dynasty on the rivers, in the X Tilth. book- 
Such is the work which has reached the present time ; it contains a 
mass of rubbish mixed up with important data. Excepting the first 
five books, the work wns originally illustrated with pictures of many 
fabulous beings, men and animals. In the Vltli. century new pictures 
were added because the old ones had been lost. The late A. Bazin has 
inexactly noticed the work in the Journal Asiatique of 1840, t. VIII. 
M. Emile Burnouf has translated a portion of it in Congres provincial 
des Or'entalistes Levallois, 1875, p. 181. Prof. Leon de Eo?ny has 
begun a complete translation in Memoires de la Soctete des Etudes 
Jajjonaises, vol. IV. pp. 81-114 (1885). 

c) Institutions and Religion. 

The early Chinese were indebted to the Bak-s their civilisers for the 
following items of culture from S, W, Asia, which may conveniently be 
enumerated under this heading : / 

the institution of an imperial system of governments^. j 

the concept of four regions or four seas, which is meaningless in 
China93; 

and a title of chief of the four mountains, which seems to be a sort 
of adviser to the early Chinese ruler and disappears soon afterwards ;^ 
it was certainly a yet recent reminiscence of the famous title of the 



20 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

King of the four regions, wliicli was borne by the Chaldean sovereign 
and suzerain^^; 
■^ the title of pastor for their tweh'e leaders^^; 

J tlio appellatives of Middle kingdom for their country 

and of Black-headed people for themselves, both names as in Assyro- 
Babylonian^^ ; 

the custom of prefixing the divine symbol character to the names of 
rulers and princes, a custom which was short-lived after their arrival in. 
China9«; 

the institution of public astronomers^^; 

and many minor customs, such as the right hand side as the place of 
honour,^'^^ &c. 

Several entries in the two preceding sections might as well have been 
included in this list. 

The Ancient religion of the Chinese exhibits various traces of im- 
portation from S. W\ Asia by their cijvilisers. The singular dualism of 
supreme divinities which dififerentiates so entirely this religion from those 
of the other Mongoloid races of high Asia is most worthy of attentioB. 
Besides the worship of Tien the Sky- Heaven so general among these 
races, we find in China the cujt of a supreme and personal god Shang-ti 
specially reserved to the rulers themselves. I have not yet published the 
monograph I have written on the subject to demonstrate this fact^^i, 
and explain how the worship of the supreme god for the time being^^^^ 
when the Bak tribes migrated from the North of Elam developed among 
them into the cult of Shaug-ti. There are besides, some other features 

-s pointing distinctly to a Chaldeo-Elamite origin. In the second chapter 
of the Shu-King (II. 1, in) it is said that Yao venerated the six Uung ; 
these celestial spirits bear names which correspond word for word with 
.J;he six minor gc>£ls of Susiana^^^. In the Annals of the Bamboo Books, 
Nai Hwang-ti (I. 3) is said to have taken advice from three beings whose 
names turn out to be those of Chaldean deities. Those ])oints are 
demonstrated in the monograph spoken of. 

Notes. 92) J. Edkins, China's phce in philolflgi/, p. 6. 

93) Obviously transferred from other horizons. 

94) The title is mentioned in the Shu-King and only during the reigns 
of Yao and Shun. (Yao tien 11, 12 ; Shun tim, 7, 15, 17, 23). It is 
alluded to by the King Tcheng of the Tchou dynasty as one of the 
appointments of officers made by Yao and Shun after having studied 
antiquity. {7\-hmi Kivan 3). 

95) Cfr. The Assyro-Babylonian shar Kibratim arbaim (^W. A. I., I. 3, 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 21 

11, 12 ; 4, 14, 15 ; 5, 19, 21) a survival of the old tetrapole of Niuirud, 
(Francois Lenormant, Essa^' de commentaire des fragments cosmo- 
goniques de Berose, Paris, 1871, pp. 27 and 323) and a nsuul title from 
the days of Naramsin, according to documental evidence (Fritz Hommel, 
Die Semitischen Volker und Sprachen (Leipzig, 1883) p. 485), and 
most probably older. 

96) Same references siS note 94. "We shall have to refer to it as a souvenir 
cf Suziana 

97) The shifted cardinal points ;from Elam to early China, p. 1 (5. (J- 0. It. 
II, p. 25). 

90) An, originally an eight-pointed star in Chalda?a. — Ti originally derived 
from the same eight pointed stars in China : for instance Ti Lai, Ti Ming, 
&c. of the mythical canon, Ti yao, Ti Shun, in Chinese history. 

99) Shu King, Yao tien. 

100) Now it is the left hand side. Cfr. Chalmers, Origin of the Chinese, 
p. 28. 

101) My task on this point has been lately li'ghtened by the remarkable 
tractates of Prof. Ch. de Harlez, Les Crogances rellgieuses des premiers 
Chinois, 60 pp. (Academic de Belgique, 1888, vol. XLI)^ and La 
Beligion en Chine, a propos du dernier livre de M, A. Eeville, Gand, 
1889. 33 pp., where this distinguished Sinologist, analysing all the 
ancient texts on the subject, has come iiKiependently to the same view 
of a complete distinction in the beginning between Shang-ti and T^en, 
and an importation of the cult of Shang-ti. Cfr. Les Croyances, pp. 36- 
37, Li Religion, pp. 20, 21. That which gives to these papers a much 
greater authority than any other recent work on the subject, is that 
the author being himself an eminent Sinologist has been able to col- 
lect together the original passages of the Chinese sacred books which 
refer to the matter, and to draw from their respective weights and com- 
parison his own conclusions. 

102) It has been remarked by Prof. A. H. Sayce that in the Chaldean 
civilisation of which that of Susiana was an offshoot, it was customary 
for a new dynasty to impose over all the other cults that of their own 
god which they used to worship before in their native place or 
region. 

103) Their names were found on ancient documents at the time of the 
renovation of literature under the Han dynasty. 

d) Historical Traditions and Legends. Ivf-i'. ^ 5 7r 

In Historical Traditions and Legends, the evidences are 
most peculiar and striking. 

They could be ascertained only since a few years, because the historical 
data which they represent were not known before, and because some of 
them, though corresponding to certain facts already known, and being 
somewhat isolate in the east, had not as yet attracted the attention of 
any scholar. 
/^ The most immediate testimony, which the Chinese Bak tribes brought 
^eastwards of their origin was their own name of Bak, which they not 



•afe- 



2? ORIGIN OP THc: EARLY 

only kept for themselves but which they gave to several of their first 
capitals. ^^ Bak was an ethnic of Western Asia which appears there 
in not a few geographical names as we shall have occasion to show 
further on.^^^^ 

The peculiar names of Middle Kingdom for their country and 
Black-heads for their own people, were doubtless souvenirs of the 
same appelatives which as we know were used in Assyro-Babylonia'°® 
with the same acceptations or nearly so.^°^ 

Many proper names of S. W. Asia might be adduced here in Geography 
and Personal surnames. For instance, in Geography: 

Su-m'it for Sum>r ; E-ket for Akkad; Din-tih for Dintir kl or 

Babylon; Tam-tum for Tamdin, north of Persian Gulf; Let-sain for 

Larsam; Sohsha for Susa; An-teng for An zan ; Sht-ki for Su- 

sik; U-lu k for Ur,uk; the Tolc-luh river for Dig I at, the Tigris, ^°^ &c. &c. 

And among surnames, such as : 

Mat-t-ki for Marduk; Hot-Bak-Ket^^^ for Urba-u otherwise U r- 
bagash ; Dim-hih for Purgi;^^" Ljrrilu for Eimaku; Shtn-nvng 
for Sargon^; Nak-khun-te for Nakhunte,'^^ and so forth. "^ The 
diffei'ence between the Chinese and the original forms of all these 
names being in most cases that which result from the much limited or- 
thoepy of the Cliinese. 

Ihesetwo lists of names mijrht be greatly lengthened, should we quote 
those of tlie royal canon of Babylonia which appears in the ancient Chinese 
documents as referring to a time anterior to the existence of the Chinese 
as a nation. 

The list of mytlii,caJ-king3 we refer to is doubtless an early version of 
the Babylonian canon which existed in China from remote antiquity^^*, 
though I am not prepared to deny the probability of the view that the rulers 
of the Bak tribes did carry it with them in their migration toChina. Distinct 
allusions to names of the list and to peculiar events of the traditions 
concerning them are found in the Clasaics; the principal names are often 
referred to, such as those of the great Hao- Fuh hi, Shen-nung, &c.ii^ 
But the traditions or, better, the legends which are joined to the list have 
been swollen by much extraneous matter and marvellous details; there has 
been combined with them some legendary souvenirs referring to the Bak 
tribes previously to their being civilised^^^; and the original text has been 
so much altered in the course of centuries by ignorant copyists through 
the various changes of writing, that it must baxuirefully silted and Ji|;itically 
edited. The comparison could not have been made of the Chinese document 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 2^3 

with the Babylonian lists, and their identity, though different in treatment, 
could, not have been recognized until recent years. It is only since the 
discoveries of tlie_cuneifQrm_liata-JDi-kings^i^, that the Baby lonian and. 
Chinese fragnientsjna y have been stu died together. Though only 27 
complete names remain on the fragments of tho list of Babylonian kings 
covered by the traditions preserved in China, the identity of the names is 
most remarkable^^^. Nothwithstanding the subsequent rearrangement 
of the Chinese fragments by later mythographs in the Flowery land, it 
is obvious that the original data when communicated to the early 
Chinese, and as I have said, somewhat mixed towards the end with 
their own beginnings, had not been yet systematized, as they appear in 
the Assyro-Babylonian tablets of late date recently discovered which we 
alluded to. 

As they stand, the Chinese fragments are divided into ten Ki i.e. 
periods or dynasties. 7v7 appears on the Assyro-Babylonian docu- 
ments with the same meaning ; their number ten reminds us of that of 
the antediluvian period ; but the fragmentary state of the cuneiform lists 
does not permit us to ascertain if they were or not divided also into 
ten Kt, 

The enumeration of the ten Ki is preceded by the mythical reigns of 13 • 
Heavenly Kings and 11 Terrestrial Kings, each having ruled 18,000 
years, or 5 sari of 3600 years. The total makes 432,000 years, which is 
precisely the number of years attributed to the antediluvian, kings by the/ 
Babylonians^^^ It is still more remarkable that the unequal division of 
432,000 years into 234,000 for the Heavenly Kings and 198,000 for thei 
Terrestrial Kings (or 65 and 55 sari) should correspond to the zodiacal \ 
basis which has been shown to underlie these speculations^^". And besides, 
the first of the Terrestrial Kings is reported to have began to rule with the 
zodiacal sign of the ^ull, in the same way as the first antediluvian reign. ^^i 

The first of the ten Ki h the reign of nine humaiijiings, followed by 
five other dynasties or KI of which no names of rulers have been preserved^22. 
then come the seventh Ki of Sumit (for Sumirjwith 22 rulers; the eighth 
Ki of D ntih \. for Dintir Ki) with 9 rulers '^^^j the ninth Ki of Tamtun 
(for Tamdin) with 24 rulers^^^. The tenth Ki begins with Na- khun te 
the Nai Huangti of the Chinese. The names of the seventh , eighth, and 
ninth Ki are given, and their comparison with the cuneiftrm lists shows 
the most remarkable identities^25_ ihg j^st name of the Chinese list is that 
of Dumang, which is said to have been killed bj^Nakhimte: it is the 
D u m a-a n of the cuneiform list. 



\ 



24 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

Some special traditions are most remarkable as obvious remnants of 
what the Bak tribes future civilisers of China, were taught previously 
to their migration. For instance among those already published, we 
find legendary souvenirs. 
2H'^Li9*Lj of a great Cataclysm which seems to refer to the flood '^'^^ 

of Sargon and the peculiarities of his life, under the altered form 
of Shen-nung ;i27 

of Dungi, as Dunkit (modern Tsanghieh) teaching the art of writ- 
ing to the Bak tribes -^^^ 

of ITakhunte, as Nai Hwangti, with peculiarities which point to the 
history of Kudur Nakhunte and his conquest of Babylonia in 228B.Ja.c.^29 

of successive apparitions of beings hali^sh, half-men at the begin- 
ning of civilisation and in connection with the introduction of writing ;130 

of the symbolic tree of life and its calend^ri(i.4eatures ;^^^ 

of a neighbouring people, subdued by Nakhunte and having a year 
of ten months (an ancient Semitic feature") ;^^2 

of the life of ancient men lasting 120 (or two sosses).^^^ 

Notes. 104) The Lang, of China before the Chinese, sect. 201. 

105) Cfr. below cliapt. V, and note 136. — The unjustified translation of 
Bak mnh, modern Peh sing by H un d r e d fami I i e s has long hindered 
all investigations on the subject. According to K'ang-hi's great 
encyclopaedia there are in China 4657 sing, or surnames, out of which 
says Prof. R. K. Douglas {China, 2nd edit., p. 251) 1619 are double 
ones. Cfr. also addition 203 to Les langues de la Chine avant les 
Chinols, p. 160. 

106) The shifting of the card, points, init. (B. & 0. R, II, 26). 

107) Cfr. ibid, note 2, p. 31. 

108) All these names are quoted in the papers referred to, note 113. 

/ 109) This is the old form of the name which has been abraded into the 
modern great Hao- Fu-hi. Cfr. my demonstration in Trad, of 
Babylonta in early Chinese documents, 1. c. 
110) In the Chinese transcription carver uf ivood, in. the Babylonian 
the man of the reed t-iblet. Cfr. Early history of the Chinese 
ciriHsation, pp. 27-28; The old Bab. char, and their Chinese den v., 
note 47 (B. & C. R. IT, 97). 
Ill The corruption of Shen-nung for Sargon is equivalent to that 
of Shinaar for Singar, &c. Cfr. The ivheat carried, &c., note 11. 

112) On this name, cfr. below, chapt. V, note 137. 

113) For all these names cfr. The Chinese mythical Kings and the 
Babylonian Canon , I.e.; Trad, of Bab., &c. I.e.: The Wheat carried 

from Mesop. to early China, I.e.; W. St. C. Boscawen, Shen-nung und 
Sargon, B. k 0. R! II, 208-209). 

114) I have prepared for publication a comparative list derived fjom the 
following authorities: San Hnang ; Sun Kia; Wai-Ki ; Lo-Pi; Kang 
Kien tcheng she-ti ; and K'ang-hi's great encyclopaedia. My first 






CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 25 

communications on the subject appeared in The Academy of Oct. 6 
and Nov. 17, 1883. Mr. Pinches will supply the cuneiform text. 
115j Cfr. R. K. Douglas, Further progress in Chinese studies (Tne Times, 
Aug. -i, 1884). — Louis Rioult de Nouville, Les origines de la civilisation 
Chinoise, pp. 24:0-249 of Revue des questions historiques, Juillet, 1884. 

116) Such, for instance, by an obvious interpolation of the names of four 
savage chiefs at the end of the eighth Ki of Dintih or Babylon. 

117) By the late George Smith, and by Mr. '1'. G. Pinches. 

118) As recognized by Prof. R. K. Douglas, Further progress, I.e. 

119) According to Berosus, Abydenus, and Syncellus. Cfr. Fr. Leiiormant, 
Les ongines de Vhistoire, I, 232 sq. 

120) By Francois Lenormant, ibid. I, 269 sq. — Cfr. also : Robert Brown, 
jun., The early Bah. Kings and the Ecliptic (The Academy, May, 1884, 
pp. 386-387. — And also W. Drummond, Origin of the Bab. Empire, 
p. 9; Th. Fergusson, Ch-.nese chro?iology, p. 84. 

121) Cfr. Fr. Lenormant, Biblical Genealogies (Contemporary Review, 
April, 1880); Fergusson, 0. C, p. 183. 

122) They are said to have reckoned respectively 5, 59, 3, 6, and 4 rulers. 

123) Four rulers are here interpolated, cfr. note 116. 

124) Two names of Bak chiefs are placed besides at the beginning. 

125) Cfr. my reserves however in The Chinese mythical kings and the 
Bab. Canon, s. f. 

126) Cfr. The shifted Card, points; from Elam to early China, pp. 29-30 
(B. O. R. II. . 

127) Cfr. The Chinese mythical kings and the Babylonian Canon, p, 5 
(The Academy, Oct. 6, 1883; Wheat carried from Mesopotamia to early 
China, pp. 1-2 (B. O. R. II, pp. 184-185). And the confirmation 
from the side of Assyriology, by Mr. W. St. Chad Boscawen, Shen- 
nmig and Sargon, B. & 0. R. II, pp. 208-209. 

128) Early history of the Chinese civilisation, p. 27; The Old Babylonian 
characters and their Ch'nese derivates, pp. 13 and 25 (B. 0. R. II 85- 
97); Tradct ons of Babylonia in early Chinese documents, p. 5 (Tlie 
Academy, Nov. 17, 1883). 

129) 2'he Chinese mythical kings, p. 6 (1. c.) ; Early history, p. 27. — 
Cfr. the date of the Chinese ? Nai Hwangti in 2332 b.c. supra. 

ISOJ The fabulous fshmen of early Bab. in ancient Chinese legends, 

pp. 1-6 (B. & 0. R, II, pp." 2-! 1-226). 
13l j The Tree of life and the Calendar plant of Babylonia and China, 

pp. 1-11 CB. & O. R. II, 149-169). 

132) The Chinese mythical Kings, p. 6 . 

133) Ibid., p. 6. 



V. Special Proofs of an Elamite Origin. 

Since the beginning of my publications on this subject, I have repeatedly 
pointed out that the elements of the Chaldean cidture they possessed, 
had been acquired, by the leaders of the Bak tribes who civilized China, 
west of the Hindu^Kush, south-east of the Caspian Sea, and in the 



\ 



26 ORIGIN OF THa EARLY 

vicinity of_Elam = Susiana. The reasons for my statement were ami are 
still the following : 

1. It is' in this region tliat the ethnic Bak, name of the tribes which 
went to N. W. China, was in existence and was best preserved, e. g. 
Bakhdi (Bactra), Bakhtan, Bakthyari, B a_g d a d, Bagis- 
tan (Bag or Bak + stan,) i.e., land of Bak,^^* Bak mes nagi, i.e., 
country of the Baks^^*. 

2. It was there also, that K u tt h i ur the like, another appellative of 
the Bak tribes, met with cognate names^^^. 

3. The name of the ruler of the Bak tribes when they arrived in the 
N.W. of China proper was, Nakliunte, modern Na i Hwang ti,^2'which 
was evidently taken in imitation of the kings_of Susiana, whose generic 
appellative, at least for many, was Nakhurde^^^, in honour of their " chief 
of the gods." 

4. The six tsung of the early Chinese were a souvenir of the six 
minor gods ofSusiana^^^, as shown by their names. 

5. In the govermental arrangements of the early Chinese they had 
twelve pastors, and the country divided under their rule.^**^ 

6. In ancient Chinese nam is the South, and with the common equiva- 
lence n-=.l, it sounds like an old souvenir of Elam as a southern country. 

7. In the Cliinese synchretic legend of Shennung, which is now 
proved to be an alteration of that of Sargon of Chaldea,i^i and in that 
of Nakhunte, several geographical names point to the same country ol 
Susiana-Elam.i*2 

8. It was in 2295 b.c. that Kudur Nakhunta, King of Susa, con- 
conquered Babylonia, and that the former order of things in Elam was 
disturbed therefrom ; now this date corresponds with the requirements of 
the skeleton of chronDlogy in China, and the immigration of the Bak 
tribes in the XXIIIrd century b.c. therein. 

9. In comparing some affinities of terms borrowed by the civilisers of 
China, I have pointed out that the loan could not have taken place from 
Chaldea, but from a cognate and intermediary country. ^^^ 

All these reasons, as may be seen, were based chiefly on Chinese sources 
and excepting the indirect evidence I had drawn from an examination of 
the inscriptions of Susiana, it was not known when the Chaldean culture 
had been introduced there. A double confirmation of the correctness of 
my views, or better of the Chinese statements, has come from the cunei- 
form inscriptions. The celebrated GUidfa in one of his inscriptions 
(statue B) states that he conquered the town of Anzan (Elam.^^*) Now 



CHINESE CIVILIZA.TION. 27 

as Gudea was older by two or three reigns than one of his success- 
ors who iwas contemporary with Dungi, and that Dungi, the Dunki 
(mod. Tsang hieh) of the Chinese tradition, taught the Bak tribes 
the art of writing, this disclosure and indirect confirmation is most 
important. On the other hand, a mention of_the Bak tribes has been 
found in the inscriptions of Eiam.^*^ 

To resume: it is difficult to ask more evident confirmations from the cun- 
eiform inscriptions than these statements, as the Bak tribes, being bar- 
barians, occupying apparently a conterminous region, could not be looked 
upon as very important. 

Notes. 134) The oldest Book of the Chinese, § 112; Wheat carried from 
Mesopotamia to early China, n. 2; Les langues de la Chine avant les 
Chiuois, pp. 120-121 and 159. 

135) In the Susian Inscriptions. Cfr. Addit. 201 to Les langues de la 
Chine avant les Chlnois, p. 159. 

136) The oldest Book, ibid., Les langues de la Chine, § 202. 

137) The full name maybe yu Nai Huang Ti, old Ku-Nak-Khiin-ie, 
but yu may be a prefix, and Nakhim appears written in one single 
group in the Ku-wen style of writing. Cfr. Fu-luan-siang, Luh shu 

fun luy, s. v.; and Tung Wei-fu, Tchuen-tze wei, s. v. 

138) Early history of the Chinese civilisation, p. 27. 

139) Cfr. 'supra IV, c, n. 103. 

140) Early history, p. 29. 

141) Compare Shen-nung^Sargon to Shennaar=Shing.'xr. 

142) T, de L.,- The Chinese mythical List of Kings and the Babylonian 
cawo?i (The Academy, Oct. 6, 1883); Traditions of Bab. in early Chinese 
documejits (ibid. Nov. 17. 1883; Wheat carried from Mesopotamia to 
early China, p. 2 (B. & O. R. II, p. 185). — W. St. Chad Boscawen, 
Shen-nung and Sargon (B, & 0. R. II, pp. 208-209). 

143) The affinity of the ten stems of the Chinese cycle with the Akkadian 
numerals ^The Academy, Sept. I, 1883): Trad, of Bab. in early 
Chinese documents (ibid., Nov. 17, 1883). 

144) Chips of Bab. a,d Ch. paloiog., p. 6 (B. & O. R. II, p. 262. 

145) Arthur Amiaud, Sirpourla, d'apres les hiscriptons de la collection de 
Sarzec, p. 13 (Revue Archeologique (1880). — T. de L., Les langues de 
la Chine avant les Chinois, 159-160. 

146) By Mr. W. St. Chad Boscawen (B, & 0. E., II, p.l89, n. 2). Cfr. 
also my note and the reference to a passage of the Nimrod epos, in Les 
langues de la Chine, addit., p, 159. 



VI. Items of Assyro-Babylonian, Egyptian and other Civiliza- 

EHTERED INTO AnCIENT ChiNA THROUGH LATER CHANNELS. 

1 The leaders of the Bak tribes do not seem to have kept up any com ^ 
miinications on their rear with the west after their arrival in the N.W, of 
China proper.^^^ It was only in later times, that further items of western 
civilisation have entered into the country. The matter is enshrouded in a> 

difficulties, because hardly anything has been preserved of the history of " 
the conterminous states, encircling the Chinese on the east, south, and 
west, and through which any intercourse or communication with the 
outside world had to pass before reaching the royal domain, where it could 
be noticed by the stylus of the official recorders. On the other hand, the 
wretched state of the old literature of ancient China, and the preser- 
vation of many features of antiquity in compilations as late as the ages 
before and after the Christian era, especially after the renaissance of 
literature, whose authors had access to documents and traditions now lost 
to us, does not permit us to ascertain the respective antiquity of the 
entrance of not a few items of western culture. And it is not at 
all improbable that some minor items of the fourfold list given in this 
paper, may have been introduced in the country through one or the other 
of the later channels described in the present chapter. Every case how- 
ever must be judged on its own merits, and in the absence of direct 
testimony, the authority of circumstantial evidence, in the west as in 
he east, must be resorted to. For instances, the mythical list of Kings, 



<t 



30 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

and the twelve names of the Babylonian months, bear intrinsic and cir- 
cumstantial evidences that they most probably belong to the early strata of 
imported knowledge by the leaders of the Baks, although they were 
afterwards mixed up and combined with other data of later introduction . 
The late and successive introduction we refer to, may have taken plfce, 
and to a certain extent did take place, through the trade-routes by land 
and by sea, west, south, and east, of which we shall speak farther on, 
and through the arrival and conquest of the Shang and of the Tchou 
peoples, whose leaders founded important dynasties of the same names. 

Notes. 147) It is most ]>robable that some displacement of populations, 
perhaj s hostile, stood in the way. 

a) Ancient Diinasties of JFestern Origin. 
The S h a n g whose name might suggest that they were formerly traders, 
while their traditions indicate a western origin near the Kuen-lun range 
and probably a kiuship with the Jungs, i"*** do not seem to have imported 
any progress of importance. Sieli the official scribe of Shun, was 
reckoned as their ancestor and this implies a certain amount of culture 
among them.^''^ The tabooing of proper names is said to have begun 
under their rule. Tho Tchou who drove them away, and succeeded them 
in the sway of China, (Xlth century b.c.) with some greatness and 
brilliancy for several centuries, were also intruders from the west. They 
were most probably red-haired Kirghizes, with some mixture of Aryan 
blood. Several of the explanations added to the olden texts of the 
Yh king by their leader Wen-wang were certainly suggested by the 
homophony of Aiyan words,'^^ and to their influence is due without 
doubt the entrance into the Chinese vocabulary of a certain number 
of Aryan words more or less crippled and altered. They were acquaint- 
ed with some notions derived from the Aryan focus of culture in 
^^ Kwarism, probably through the route of the Jade traffic^^i which they 
introduced into their new coimtry.^'''^ Such for instance the 28 lunar 
mansions instead of the 24 stellar points of older times. ^^^ But nothing 
from Assyro-Babylonia seems to have been imported by them, some im- 
portant rites and regulations were established by the founders of their 
dynasty, who seem to have been gifted with extraordinary capability. 
in that respect, and have systematized in a durable manner not a few 
ideas and institutions which, before their time, were loose in the coun- 
try. During these two dynasties, it is the Jade traffic which may have 
been the Channel through which Western ideas and notions have reached 
China. ^' 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 81 

Notes. 14-^) On the Jungs and their language, cfr. Thehmguuge-i of China 

before the Chinese, sec. 2, 150. 151. 
149; Ibid., sec. 210. 

150) On the baseless theory of a supposed afifinity between the Chinese 
and the Aryan languages, cfr. llie king, of China before the Chinese, 
sec. 208, n. 2, and the additions p. 161 of the French edition. 

151) On the trade route of Jade, see further on. 

152) The invention of the boussole or compass has been attributed to 
one of them, Tchou kung, uncle of Tching-Wang, first king of the 
dynasty, -and a justly celebrated man. Dr. J. Legge, {Chinese Clas- 
sics, vol. Ill, pp. 535-7 ), has exposed the baselessness of this story, 
when Tchou kung was said to have presented south-pointing chariots 
to some envoys of the Suh-shin of the North or of the Yueh-shang 
of the South. (Cfr. below in the present chapter, and note 209. 

153) On the astronomy of Kwarism, an Aryan focus of civilization, 
east of the Caspian sea, from \^^ b. c, cfr. Albiruni, Chronology 
of Ancient nations, pass., trad. Sachau, London, 1879. 

b^ The Jade Eastern traffic. 
\ Jade so-called, i.e., nephrite, which was not found by the Chinese in 
China, notwithstanding some unfounded statements to the contrary,^^^was 
, in all times known and highly prized by the Chinese, who looked upon it 
as symbolizing power and authority.^^^ It is not at all unlikely that 
the Bak tribes had been made acquainted with the Nephrit by the 
trade which used to bring the articles of Jade to the West. Per- 
haps the route of this trade was an incitement for their shaping 
their way eastward. Anyhow, should they have been still ignorant 
of that precious stone, they had occasion to hear about it when on their 
route to China. 

*With the exception of unimptrtant beds, in the Caucasus, and in 

the rivers of the Yablono and Saiansk mountains, East and S. W. 

of Lake Baikal, ^^^ which were not known in olden times, the true 

jade or nephrite exists only in what is known as Chinese Turkestan. 

Mount Mirdjai reputed to be a mass of jade, and famous in the 

geographical romances of ancient China, ^^'' mount Sertash, both at 

74 miles from Yarkand, and the rivers Ulgunkash and Karakash 

near Ilchi.^^^ were the principal if not the sole source from where 

1 nephite jade was exported in the west and in the east.^*^ This jade 

'\ traffic was, according to all probabilities, of a second- and third-hand kind, 

/ which could not provide a regular channel for the introduction of S.W, 

/ Asiatic civilisation into the East. Its importance, however secondary, 

under that respect, must not be overlooked. There is no positive evidence 



32 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

that the Bak tribes in their old country were engaged in such a traffic, 
but the following fact is rather suggestive that they were. The excava- 
tions at Uru=Mugheir, the old town of Dungi, whose name has been re- 
ferred to in connection with the early conquest of Anzan by Gudea, and 
their teaching of the art of writing to the Bak tribes, have revealed the 
use or trade of nephrite-jade. ^^'^ As this jade could not come from any 
other region than that of Turkestan through the country of the Bak 
r tribes, the connection, borne out as it is by the circumstantial evidences of 
the case, shows the Bak tribes to have been already at that time long pre- 
viously to their migration to China, intermediary already between S.W. 
Asia and the East. The extension of Nephrite-Jade traffic further west, 
to Nimrud, Hissarlik, the Helvetian palafittes, the megalithic monuments 
and other places of the same period, does not belong to our field of 
enquiry. ^^2 ^' 

Once in China, the Chinese Bak tribes received nephrite-jade from 

^ their rear. The legendary accounts on the subject are not all inventions, 
and there is doubtless some truth underlying the magnified and fabled re- 
ports. In the ninth year of Shun, Si Wang Mu sent envoys with pre- 

A sents consisting of white jade rings, or archers thimbles in jade, a tube of 
white jade, and topographical maps.^^^ Si-Wang-Mu, whatever unknown 
personage the name may have described originally, became the impersona- 
tion of the queen rulers, whose princedoms lay on the North of Thibet along 
Kuenlun, and who have had occasionally some intercourse direct and indirect 
with the Chinese states. ^^^ A Si-Wang-Mu was reported to have pre- 
sented Huang-ti with topographical maps.^^^ And it is near a Si Wang 
Mu that the great Yll is reported to have studied. ^^*' A Si-Wang-Mu 
appears again in connection with a journey which King Muh, fifth ruler 
of the Tchou dynasty^^^ made in the West of China, along the Kuenlun 
range, where he was presented by her with some jade objects, ^^^ and some 
skilful workmen and where he examined their calendar and books I This jour- 
ney^^^which I am inclined to look upon as more important than is commonly 
believed,^^'^ has been made the theme of all sorts of fables, extravaganzas 
and marvels, among which the historical truth and its particulars are 
probably lost irretrievably to history. Muh Wang's expedition is reported 
in the seventeenth year of his reign. On the following year the Si Wang 
Mu came to the Chinese court with presents and was lodged in the Tchao 
palace. In all that concerns Si Wang Mu and the mysterious travels of 
Muh Wang ^of Tchou it must be remarked that jade-stones play great 




CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 33 

part,!'^^ and therefore the whole is so narrowly connected with the route /* 
of jadeirgilfic that we had to mention t here, inasmuch as, there are in -MOc 
the traditions on the subject, some references to a transmission, however 
slight and shadowy it may have been, of Western knowledge, to Chhia.i^^ 
But there are some other proof of jade traffic from Turkestan. Some 
of them are found in the Yii Kung or Tribute of Fm,'73 a work of the 
Shang dynasty, where it is recorded that the W. provinces of Yung- 
tchou and Tsiang-tchou, corresponding to Shensi and Kansuh and to !N. 
Szetchuen respectively, produced to the Chinese court, jade stones 
of several forms. ^^^ This jade, since it is not foimd in China proper,^^* y 
could only reach these provinces through the trade from Turkestan. 

Tchou Sin, the last ruler of the Yn Dynasty (circa 1120 B.C.) received as 
present from the Tan-tchi country, probably through the Tchou people who 
made him some presents from the West in several instances, a pillow in 
Jade shaped like a tiger.^^^ This was undoubtedly procured by the same 
traffic. 

Kuan-tze, an important writer of the seventh century b.c, states that 
Jade comes to China from the Yli-she monntains, in the far West, 
where thePsun sets.^^^ 

All the information we possess here on the Jade traffic shows it to be a 
second-hand one; and however ancient it may have been, the amount of 
knowledge which has reached the Chinese through this channel cannot 
have been of importance, and must have consisted only of partial, incom- 
plete notions, sometimes transmogrified on the way. 

Now let us enquire about the other trade routes through which have 
been imported some elements of foreign civilizations. 

Notes. 154) There are two principal sorts of jade, the nephrite and the > 
Jadeite which differ one from another by their chemical composition. 

155) We allude to the references made to the provinces of Shansi and 
Yunnan as producing jade, 

Abel de Remusat in stating that jade was found at Tai T'ung (Northern 
Shansi), a statement repeated from him nearly everywhere and sometimes 
in a faulty manner, was mistaken by the late and loose meaning of the 
symbol yii, which has often been used for gems in general, and equally 
applied to Jasper. Now Jaspar and not jade figures amono-st the 
products at Tai t'ung in the descriptions of the province, in Grosier. 
Description de la C/ime, Wells Williams, The middle kingdom, and 
other trustworthy works. — As to the reference to Western Yunnan, it 
is simply a geographical error which has arisen from the fact that the 
Jadeite from Mogung in Upper Burma arrived in China through 
that province. ,; [ 

However Ralph Pumpelly, Geological Researches \n China, Mongolia, 



34 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

and Japan, p. 118 (Smithsonian contributions to Knowledge, 1886) 
has indicated some blue Jade'? at Tung=an, distr. of Wu-ting. N. C. 
Yunnan, (jreen and blue Jade ? at Mount Mo-fu near Li-king, and black 
jade? at Maumtoz (Mungman tu sze 1^=) near Yung-bchang. ^ 
, 156) The symbol yu.j^ade has that meaning. It was formerly ok and its 
pristine form was derived from the ancient Babylonian uk having the 
same meaning Cfr. The Tree of Life and the Calendar plant, note 88. 
— Prof. Max MlillerfFebr. 3, 1880) has some interesting remarks which 
explain (that connection of meaning apparently unknown to him) and 
show how important and powerful among uncivilised was a man possessing 
' a jade-chisel which could cut iron nails and any other thing with facility. 
Cfr. his work Biographies ofioords (London, 1888), p. 222. 

157) The Amoor in the far North rolls down jade pebbles from the Yablono 
Monntainsof the Trans-Baikal district of Siberia (Nevil Story Maskelyne). 
T. W. Atkinson, Oriental and Western Siberia (London, 1811) has 
found some in the river beds among the Saiansk Mountains, S.W. of 
Lake Baikal, and therefore west of the preceding. 

158) The Yu shan of the Shan Hat King, Bk. II, fol. 29. 

159) Cfr. S. Blondel, Le Jade, Etude sur la plerre appelee yu par les 
chinois, sect, II. (Paris, 1875 j.-G. Schlegel, Uranographie chinoise, 
p. 1 %1 .—Notes and queries on China and Japan, 18(58, vol. 11. pp, 173, 
174 and 187 ; vol. IV. 1870, p. 33. — An exhaustive treatise on Jade 
is that of Fischer: Nephrite und Jadeit, Stuttgard, 1875. — Cfr. 
also for the geography Capt. Trotter in Forsyth's Account of the mission 
to Yarkand and Kashgar, 1873-74, p. 154. 

160) Of course we leave aside the jades of New Zealand and America. 

161) I have proposed to recognize in the Uk-nu stone of the East, of the 
- cuneiform inscriptions the Jjje of Tarkestan. (Cfr. The Tree of Life, 

uote 49). Four articles of nephrite-jade have been found in tiie rnins 
' ofUr, and one at Nimrud, as described by Dr. 0. Schoetensack in the 
ZeHschr'ftfir^t\mo\og\e. Berlin, 1887, pp. 125-126. At Nimrud it 
is a cylinder, at Ur, celts. Unless it be for a special use because of 
their toughness, the nephrite axes in this civilised country could only be 
there for trading purposes. The British Museum possesses a cylinder 
of ancient work from Babylon in Jade. 
/l62) The precious nephrita worked in the forms wrongly known as celts 
neatly polished, with edges sharp and intact, is found along the route 
from Khotan in Turkestan, its starting point, to the Jaxartes, to the 
Oxus, then south of the Caspian sea, in Babylonia and Assyria, along 
the Northern Asia Minor shores, bordering upon ancient Troy, then 
passes to the Peloponnesus, where it directs its course to Crete, and, 
not touching Egypt, passes from Greece to Italy, whence it is distri- 
buted among the Helvetian lakes, the Megalithic monuments of Armurica 
&c., &c. Cfr. Valentine in Prof. Howard Osgood, Prehistoric Com- 
merce and Isracf, pp. 168-169 (The Baj^tist Quarterly Review, 1885, 
vol. VII. pp. 163-184).— Prof, Nevil Story-Maskelyne, pp. 211-214 
in Max Muller's Biograpliies of Words. — Alex. Bertrand, La Guide 
avant les Gaulois (Paris, 1884) pp. 130-131. — G. de Mortillet, Le/ 
Prehistorique. pp. 537-539. ' 
163) Tchuh Shu KH nien Shun, IX year. Shang shu ta tchuen 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION, 3& 

Ta Tai LI ; San tchao ki ; Kung-tze tchi yen ; Li ton ivei ;j; T.sih sten 
lull ; Fung suh tung ; all ancient works quoted in the Kin ting leu kin 
Vn shu tsih tcheng. 

164) Si Wang Mu has absorbed the little that was known of other . 
names of female rulers. The Shan hai King Bk. II. speaks also of a 
Yng Mu, cfr. note 91 of tlie present })aper. On Si Wang Mu, cfr. 
The Tree of Life and the Calendv Plant of Bah/Ionia and China, 
part IV. Ancient Missionaries wanted to identify Si Wang Mu with 

the Queen of Saba ; this fancy has been refuted by G. Pauthier, 
Chine, p. 94. 

165) Tsih sien lull. I.e. 

166) According to Silin-tze, a writer of the IlIrd century u.c. 

Shan Hal King (gloss) Bk. II., fol. 19. 

167) B.C. 1001-947 according ti) the usual chronology ; b.c. 9G2-907 in 
the Annals of the Bamboo Books. 

168) Jade is a most important factor in all that concerns Si-Wang-Mu, 
and Mull-Wang's journey. 

169) The journey which began as a punitive expedition against the A7- 
ueii Jung tribes of Naga race on the North-east of Tibet, cfr. The Lang, 
of China before the Chinese, (sect. 150, 151) who five years before had 
presented. some asbestos cloth &c. (^Lih tai ki she; G. Pauthier, Chine, 

p. 96). — As to the details of the traveh, cfr. A7 tchung Tchou shu ; ^ 
Lieh-tze 400 b.c. ; Muh Tien-tze tchuen, 350 B.C. ; Siiin tze, 300 B.C.; 
Shi tze, 280 b.c. ; Poh wuh tchi by Tchang Hua, 250 a.d. ; Shih »/ 
Ki by Wang Kia, 400 a.d., Bk. III. ; Shuh y ki by Jen Fang, 500 
A.D. ; Hon Han Shu ; Tat ping yu Ian, 983 a.d., Bk. 85, fol. 2-3 ; 
and many more recent compilations. 

170) Cfr. for instance. The Tree of Life, sect. IV., and notes. 

171) Though not so important as would imply the legend of the ancient 
Iranian King Djamgjiid having married a daughter of Ma hang K ing 
of Matchin. Cfr. Lassen, Indiache Alterthumskunde, I. 619-622.) 
And the contentions of Abdal-Lih Beidawy, in his general history 
that Mu-Wang went to Persia. Cfr. Pauthier. China, p. 94, as well 
as that of M. Paleologue, L'art Chinuis (Paris, 1888), p. 102, who, in 
order to explain the Assyro-Babylonian affinities which were glaring to 
his eyes, wants Muh Wang in his one year journey to have gone to • 
Media. ^ usian a, Chaldea. 

172) It is very curious tu mention here that the first enactme its in jf^ 
which ring-weight-money hwan are spoken of, i.e. in 947_b.c. 
should have been issued under his reign, and may be the result of 
what he learned in his journey. The system was Egyptian and was 
especially in use for trade with the Asiatics, at the time of the milita: r 
supremacy of Egypt, but it was not used in Assyro-Babylonia. Cf'\ 
Fr. Lenormant, Histoire ancienne de VOrient, vol. III. p. 58 ; and E. 
Babelon, ibid, vol. V. p, 114. 

173) In the Shu-King. It is a description of all the engineering works 
made by the Chinese (and their allies under their supervision) in China 
to regulate the rivers and their floods. It contains also a description 
the products of the same geographical division of the country as 
known under the Shang dynasty. 



Se ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

174) Shu King, part III. Bk. I., 69 and 81. 

175) Cfr. what is said above on the subject. 

176) It was discovered during some excavations made in 159 a.d.. Cfr. 
Shihy lei; G. ^ch\Qge\,'^Uranographie Chinoise, p. 789; a real mine of in- 
formation and where several archjeological finds of jade implements 
are noticed. 

177) Kuan tze ; G. Schlegel, ibid. p. 787. K'ang-hi tze tien, 114 + 4, 
fol. 49 verso. 

c) Ancient trade-route of the Eastern sea trade. 
On the East and South-east is the sea. The Chinese, advancing 
from the West, did reach the sea-shore, and this near the Shantung pen- 
insula, five centuries only after having tntered China, i. e. in the XXIIIrd 
century B.C. They were not themselves fully established near the sea 
for many centuries afterwards, and the borders were in possession of 
non-Chinese states semi-civilized, and even less than that. On two geo- 
graphical points some exceptions are important to notice, north and 
south of the said peninsula, as the channels through which an Egyptian 
influence brought in by the sea trade was introduced into China. 
/ An important emporium and sea-port, non-Chinese, Tsi-moh, and the 
surrounding country of Shantung, has played a prominent part in the 
development of current metallic money. ^^^ The first enactments on cur- 
rency,^^° those concerning the weights which have proved to be based 
upon the mina of Carchemish,i^o in 680 B.C., are all connected with that 
region of Shantung reached by foreign trade. 

Lang-nga,i^2 ^^ important town in that same region, was founded be- 
fore the Vlth century b.c.:^^^ its name is singularly suggestive of an 
importation by the sea-traders of Asianesia and the West, Lanka (Lan- 
ka pura of Ceylon, Lanka-Balus (Nicobar), Lang-nga-siu of the north 
of Java, marking their route. ^^^ 

It is there that Ts'in She Hwang-ti, the founder of the 
Chinese empire 221 B.C., -resided for some time previously to that 
date. It was in these surroundings, permeated as they were by 
foreign ideas, that he prepared some of the important innovations, 
that made his name famous, and which seem to have been suggested 
by reports of Western ideas, institutions and events ; such, for instance, 
as the division of his dominion into 36 kiun-s, which remind us of 
the 36 nomes of Egypt,^®^ and perhaps also the Burning of the 
books (213 B,c,)i8^. It is in the same vicinity that sculptures have been 
discoveed, whtch, though of rather late date (147 a.d.), bear the impug- 
nable testimony of an influence of Egyptian art, which the Chinese are 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 37 

unable to explain, ^^' and which is mixed up with Chinese data. The* 
mixed influences from Western Asia and Egypt through the sea-trade is,) 
30 much the more remarkable that this sea-trade cannot have been import- 
ant in ancient times, and grew up only in the centuries which preceded the 
Christian Era. Anything from tlie West could not reach China except in a'\ 
hand to hand manner, having to change several times on the way. At 
the time of the Christian era, hardly anything had as yet been heard in 
China of the outside world by the eastern^^%jasts, and even at the time of 
the East Han Dynasty (a.d. 25 - 220) it is positively stated in the 
dynastic annals, and this by hearsay, that the seafarers did not go further 
than some vaguely indicated countries which cannot possibly be further 
than the Malacca peninsula, if so far.^^^ And so late as the beginning of 
the fifth century, a.d., Fa-liien, the Buddhist, coming back to China from 
Ceylon, was compelled to make the journey in two different boats, from 
Ceylon to Java, and from Java to China. 

Notes. 177) Kuan-tze ; G. Schlegel, th/'d., p. 787. — JCang-hl tze tien, 
lU + 4, fol. 49^'. 

178) Lat. 34^ 15' in the modern Lai tchou fu. cfr. G. Playfair, 
The Cities aud Towns af China (Hong-Kong, 1879) No. 66o. 

179) Cfr. T. de L., Historical Catalogue of Chinese Money, Vol. 1, 
])p. 4, 131-132, 213, 319, &c. Metallic money was not established 
in Western China before 337 b.c. 

180) Cfr. Historical Catalogue, p. 1. 

181) Babylonifin and Old Chinese Measures. (The Academy, Oct. 10, 

1885.) The regulations were made by Kwan Tze, a famous minister 

of Huan, Dake of 'isi. N. W. Sliantung) at proximity of this sea- 
trade influence. 

182) Referred to the present department of Tchu tchong (Lat. 36*^ Leng. 
119^58) in Tsing tcliou. Shantung. 

183) It was conquered in -163 B.C. by the sea-border state of Yueh and 
became its capital until 379 b.c. 

184) The lang. of China before the Chinese, sec. 214. — Col. H. Yule, 
Notes on the oldest records of the sea-route to China from Western Asia 
(#roc. R. Geogr. Sne.,Nov. 1882) ; Alfred Maury, Desanciens rapports 
de V Asie occidentale avec VInde transgangetique et la Chine (Bullet 
Soc. Geogr., Paris, 1846>. 

185) As pointed out by Thomas Fergusson, Chinese Researches, I. p. 
59. — According to ancient authors the number of the names was re- 
ported to be 36, though as a fact, the number varied. Cfr. G. 
Maspero, Histoire Ancienne, 4e edit. p. 19. 

186) It has been suggested (Fergusson, Chinese Researches, I. 41-59), 
that the idea of suppressing all ancient history and literature has been 
impressed on the mind of tlie founder of the Chinese Empire by reports 
of similar measure for the same object in the West. Berosns (Cory's 
Ancient fragments, p. 36), who lived in 340-270, b.c, states that 
Nabonassar collected all the mementos of the Kings prior to himself, 
and destroyed them, that tlie enumeration of the Chaldean Kings 



38 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

might eomiiience with him. It is just what did TsUn She-Hwang-ti 
as remarked by W. F. Mayers {Joum. North China Branch, R. A. S., 
December, 1867, p. 162). — Moses of Khorene has told the same tale 
of tlie fabled Ninas, ( II st. Armen, ch. 13, p. 40), and so did Albirnni 
of the Kwarismians or Chorasmians {Chronology of Ancient Nations, 
tr. Sachau, p. 58), and al?o of the Persians by Alexander-the-Great or 
his lieutenants [ibid, p. 157). 

187) Dr. S. W. Bushell of Peking has shown me the squeezes taken on 
the monument, which he exhibited at the Berlin Oriental Congress. 
Cfr. his notice on Inscriptions from the Tombs of the Wu family from 
the Tzli-yun shan=: Purple-cloud iiills, 28 li south of the city of Chia- 
hsiang lisien in the province of Shantung ; pp. 79-80 of Ost-asiat, 
sect., Berlin Orient. Congr., 1881 j. Chia-hsiang hsien or Kia-siang 
hien. is in Tsi ming tchou, by Lat. 35^32' and Long. 11G030'.— Prof. 
Robert K. Douglas, Ancient sculptures in China, and nine plates, 
(J. R. A. S., 1886, vol. XV III.) has reproduced severi^l characteristi- 
cal parts of these sctilptures, from the Kin Shih Soh collection (1806), 
with their Egyptian models. They are most remarkable. 

188) Should this trade have been active or regular, the Chinese would 
have learned earlier than they did anything about the Peng-lai islands 
said to be five by Lieli-tze (lYth cent , b c.) and rnly three at the time 
of Shc-Hwang-ti, under whose reign they were still mythical. Is Peng- 
lai=:Polo. ' island ' in Malay ? 

189) Namely the Naked (men) kingdom and the Black-teeth men king- 
dom. IIuu Han shu, Bk. 115; tr.A. V\\\\%, History of the Eastern 
Ba?-harians, ip. 81 (Revue de V Extreme Orient, t. I., 1882;. It was 
only in the sixth century tliat the Chinese acquired some knowledge of 
Java, Sumatra, &c. Cfr. W. P. Groeneveldt, Notes on the Mcday 
Archipelago and Malaca (Batavia, 4to, 1872 ; also. Prof. Leon de 
Rosny, Les peujiles orie/itaux connus des anciens chinois, 2nd edit. 
Paris, 1886. 

d) Ancient Trade Routes by Land, South and South-West. 

* 

The oldest information we possess of any intercourse with the South and 
West in ancient times goes back to the beginning of the Tchou dynasty, 
i.e. XTth century u.c. In the Tchiiu Shu, a work saved from the 
wreck of literature, and a production of that dynasty,!^'' which is probably 
more trustworthy^^Hhan was formerly sup))osed, the arrival of some 
trading parties, magnified as ambassadors, is reported. ^^^ One of them 
comes from Shou Mi or Tchou Mi, a j)lace which lias been identified 
with Ta-yao, in the prefecture of Tsu-hiung west-centre of Yunnan. ^^"'' 
Tlvis party brought to the court of Tcheng Wang, the second king of the 
dynasty, as a tribute, say the Chinese account, a monkey from a country 
where it is called /i'Mfi^an^, which is the Dravidian name for this animal; 
The explanations show that country to be N. E. India. No other in- 
forraatjon has been preserved about this curious and interesting event 



CHINEfE CIVILIZATION. '69 

wliich gives ns in the East a Dravidian word contemporaneous with those'' 
of the same languages learned bj the trade of Solomon with Opliir (Kings 
I. 11, 22). 

Notes. 1 90') A large part of the following is abstracted from my paper On three 
embassle>< from Indo-China to the Middle Kingdom 80u0 years ago, read 
before the Royal Asiatic Society on June 16, 1884, and still un- 
published. 

191) Prof. S. M. Russel, Discussion of Astronomical Records in Ancient 
Chinese hooks. I.e. p. 19fi, has been able to verify an eclipse of the moon 
in the year 1136, which is mentioned in that work on the 35th year of 
Wen Wang. 

192) Yh Tchou shn, sect. 59, fol. 8. — It is also mentioned in the Shan 
hai King (edit. 1783). sect. X., fol. 2-3, sect. XVI., f. 5, and sect. 
XVIII., fol. 31 and in the Shwoh-wen (edit. I598j, sect. VIII.. 
fol. 24. 

193) It became in the IVtli century b.c, part of the famous state of 
TsKN (331 B.C. — 100 A.D. which monopolized the trade with the soutli, 
and whose name through the sea traders furnished the west with the 
name of China. Cfr. my notices in Col. H. Yule, Glossari/ of Anglo- 
Indian tcords (Loudon, 1886) p. 157 ; Beqinn ngs of uriting, sect. 80 ; 
B. & 0. a., I., The Sinim of Isaiah not the Chinese, sect, 3 and below. 

* * 

In a much later work^^^we find that another party came to the court of the 
same king. Tcheng of the Tchou dynasty, from a country called Nele, or 
iVer^,^^^ which I have proposed to identify with the old country of Xorai, on 
the west side of the Irawadi, between Manipuri, and Momieu of S. W. 
Yunnan. No mention is made of anything they brought, a fact 
most remarkable, as their country became afterwards the Shan state of 
'Mogaung, famous for its mines of amber and jadeite, which from th re 
are exported to China, since a few centuries before tlie Christian era. 
All ancient allusions to Jade referred to the north-west, and it is only 
in later times that we find the first allusion in literature to this jade of 
I south-west. ^^^ The mines were probably not worked as yet, at the time 
of the two mercantile expeditions spoken of, and it is not improbable 
that the great prices which they saw put upon the jade stones at the 
Chinese Court has awakened their attention to the value of similar' 
kinds of stones found in' the country of the Noras, one of them.i^^ 

The references by various authors indicate an old trade route from the 
district of the mines, i.e. Mogaung, by Wainmo and Kakhyo, passing 
through Momien^^s where jade work has long been going on,^^^ Yung 
tchang a famous mart for western products, Ta-li fu and Ta-yao to Szet- 



/ 



40 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

chuen by Tung-tchuen and Tchao-tuag, the Kin-sha Kiang and the 
Min river, a route of which we shall liave to speak farther on again, 
or by Ning-yuen, Tsing-Ki and Ya-tchou to Tcheng-tu, the capital 
of the province. ^*^^ 

The identification of the Nere country with that of Norai:=Mogaung 
is further supported by statements of the Chinese record on the geo- 
grapliical and curious features of the country which cannot leave any 
doubt on tlie matter. And about some astronomical knowledge possessed 
by the tradeis, knowledge for which the Nora people have long remained 
famous. This knowledge, however, being the same as that of the 
Chinese themselves with reference to the calendar was no gain for them, 
but seems to be an indice of an earlier influence of Chinese civilisation in 
the Nora country, through the Szetchuen traders of whom we shall speak 
farther on. 

The ascertaining of the comparatively late working of the jadeite mines 

•J of Mo^aung is an important feature for the date of ancient trade of this 

Stone, as jadeite in the east is found nowhere else than there, and is 

f'jreign to the geognostic structure of the Chinese Turkestan, where 

nephrite comes from. As jadeite has been found in the lacustriau dwellings 

of Switzorland and also in not a few places of remote times, perhaps 1500 

more or less b.c. of the neolithic jieriod, it has been rather prematurely 

assumed that, as in the case of the nephrite-jade, the jadeite implements 

had been brought from the Mogaung mines. If such had been the case, it 

would tend to demonstrate the existence of trade with Indo-China at that 

remote period'^^. But the whole is moonshine. Attention lias been 

called to the fact that the jadeite implements of Europe belong to severa^ 

varieties which are located in their respective areas, and therefore must 

have been brouglit from short distances, where their origin will be traced 

♦me day or other"^^. Tlie difficulty has been settled from another side; 

chemical analysis has shown that the cumpositionof the jadeite implements 

found in Europe is not the same as that of the jadeite of Upper Burma^***. 

Therefore all speculations and inferences drawn in relation to an ancient 

trnde of jade stones between that part of the world and the west are put to 

naught by these conclusions^''^. 

Notes. 194) In the Shih-i lei by "Wnng Kia (IVth cent, a.d.), with many 
other souvenirs and legends of olden times saved from oblivion. 

195) It is this country in which the late Pauthier wanted to recognize 
the name of the Nile ! and therefore Egypt, Stan, Julian proposed 
afterwards an identification with the Indian town of A'aZa, but this town 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. ' 41 

vvas founded by Asoka, thus eight centuries after the event reported iu 
the text, and its name is differently transcribed in Cliinese. 

196) In tlie Siih Han shu by Sie Tch'eng (250 a.u.) it is stated that 
the Ng-ai-Lao f^West of Yunnan) brought fortli some Kuang-tchu and 
amber {hu-pck) during the Han dynasty. In tlie Po icu tchl by Tchang 
Hwa (a.d. 232-300.) Amber is said to come from Yung-tchang, 
the great mart of W. Yunnan. Cfr. Tai ping yu Ian, Bk. 88, fol. 1. — 
The Green jade called pile (cfr. W. WilUams, Syll. diet, p. 691) was ^ 
known to the Romantist geographers of the IVth century, Lieh-tze 
and Tchwang-tze, but only in the case of the latter with reference to 
the country of Shuh, then part of Szetchuen, and this in a fabled way. 

It was only under Suan-ti (73-49 u.c.) of the Han dynasty that pih 
stones were heard of more positively as found in, or better arriving 
through, Yh tchou i.e. parts of Yunnan and Szetchuen (^Han shu.) The 
word was then applied to Jadeite which is still now one of its accepta- 
tions. The product is mentioned in the Saii-tii-fu of 'l"so-sze (Ilird 
cent. A.D.), in the Wel-lioh (250 a.d.) The Kioang-ya dictionary 
(227-240 A.D.) states that two sorts of piL\ one pHao i.e. azure, the 
other luk, i.e. green, come through Yueh-sui which corresponds to a 
part of the modern prefecture of Tsu-hinng, West center of Yunnan. 
The Tai Kang ti ki (circa 300 a.d.) states that the pik stones come 
through Tsing ling hien (later Tayao in tlie same prefecture of Yunnan; 
cfr. G. Playfair, Cities andtowns of China, 1167, 6893), which curiously 
enough as an identication of trade route is that same country of Shou 
Mi from where traders had come to the Chinese court of Tcheng Wang 
as reported in the text. (Cfr. Tai ping yu km, Bk. 89, fol. 2.) The 
proper word for ' jadaite' is no\f fei-ts\ii i W, W. o.c. 140 ; Geerts, 
Les produits de la nature Japonaise et Chinoise, II, 465),and that for 
' Jasper ' is the above word pih-{]jidi). 

197) Tchuh shu ki men, Tchou y wang, year II. 

198) The country was visited by Capt. Hannay, Dr. Griffith and Dr. 
Bayfields in the years 1835-1837. — Cfr, C. H. Yule, A Mission to 
Ava, 1858. On the mines and work, cfr. also some informations in Dr. 
John Anderson, A Report on the Expedition to Western Yunnan via 
Bhamo (Calcutta, 1871), pp. 63, 65, 6^ 67, 327, 328 ; Mandalay to 
Momlen, London, 1876), pp. 201-202. 

199) Anderson, Report, pp. 67, 328 ; Mandalay to Momien, p. 201 
The author says that the trade in his time had greatly diminished in 
importance. Capt. W. Gill in 1877, and A. R. Colquhoun in 1879, 
who passed through the town do not mention the jade industry. E. 
Reclus, Asie Orientale, p. 748. states that jade is sent through Man- 
dalay to Canton. The Mohammedan rebellion has for long and in 
some cases disturbed for ever the old state of things. 

200) The latter route to Burma is probably older than the other. Marco- 
Polo followed it as shown by Col. H. Yule, Geographical Introduction 
to Capt. W. Gill's journey, 2nd edit., p. 93, and Travels of Marco- 
Polo, 2nd edit. vol. II, p. 57. 

201) " lis observent le soleil et la lune pour connaitre la direction ou la 
position des royaumes etrangers ; ils comptent les alternatives de froid 
et de chaud pur connaitre les annees et les mois. En examinant les 



42 GEOGRAPHY FROM THE NILE 

epoques des premieres lunes dans ce royaume en trouva que lenr cal- 
endier etait d'accord avec celui de la Chine." (Transl. Stan. .Tulien. 
Simple expose d'un fait honorable, p. 204.) — " For the Noras (the 
aboriginal population of the region) were a comparatively civilised 
people, and the few who remain are still regarded in Mogaung, Khamti 
^ and Upper Assam as a learned class, and are generally employed 
among the Buddhist priesthood and others as astronomers and writers." 
(Ney Elias, Introcl. sketch of the history of the Shans, p. 39). 

202) Fischer, Neuen Jahrbilcher fur Mineralogie, 1881, p. 131 ; Dr. 
Howard Osgood, Prehistoric Commerce and Israel, p. 169. 

203) G. de Mortillet, Le Prehistorique, (Paris, 1883), p. 539. 

204) Damour, Compte Rendus de VAcademie des sciences; I'h. Morel, Les 
dijferentes especes de Jades et lew classernent au point de vue nun. 
eralogique ; Catalogue du Musee Guimet, 1883, I., 309-315. 

205) No inference can be made on the same matter from the uge of Jade 
in India, as the introduction of Jade into the country dates only from 
the early Mogul Emperors of Delhi. Cfr. N. Maskelyne in Max 
MuUer's Biographies of words, p. 213. 



* * * 



The most renowned party of foreigners who reached the Chinese court 
in ancient times from the south, were those who came from Yueh-Shang, — 
a name which in its ideographical rendering means trail of the outside 
borders. It has been identified with the southern part of Tungking.^**^ 
The unsophisticated legend^o^says that in the sixth year of the regency of 
Tchou Kung, uncle to the young King Tcheng of Tchou, they presented 
three elephants and a white pheasant.^os Nothing is said of any other-pre- 
sents nor of their bringing any book or calendar with them, as was the 




/ 



44 ORIGIN OF THK EARLY 

case witli some other parties ; they are chiefly known from the spurious 
statement that tiie Duke of Tchou presented them with five south point- 
ing chariots to facihtate their return to their remote country. But this 
account has been shown to be baseless. ^^^ 

Like the travelling parties from Sli6u-Mi and from Nere, the mission 
from Yueh-shang was of no importance for the increase of Chinese civilisa- 
1 tion. None of them liad anything to teach, while they had everything to 
learn: their respective countries were still uncivilised, and so far as we 
can judge^i*^ they only knew what chance had permitted them to get 
from Chinese culture. A fabling inference which has been developed into 
a regular tradition, and though unknown to the oldest statements about 
the journey of the Yueh-shang people has been eagerly adaptated by the 
doers of cVnnamite history, attributes to the latter trading parly magnified 
as ambassadors, the knowledge of a writing proper to their own country.^i' 
This spurious story must have been concocted in putting together, the 
inference drawn from the statement that interpreters were employed by 
the travellers, and the genuine existence in Annaui of a phonetic writing 
of unknown date which was suppressed in 186 a.d."'- This writing 
may have been introduced from India, er have consisted in a syllabic 
derivation and simplification of the Chinese characters introduced by the 
trade of Sliuh. but in either case it must have been several centuries 
later than the journey referred to.^i* 

All these three trading parties had been attracted to the Chinese court 
by the rising fortune of the House of Tchou just beginning its rule over 
the Chinese dominion, and the expectations which its wealth gave to 
foreign commerce. 

Notes. 200) The Hoang riet dia du chi of Annam (1829), states that the 
old country of Yueh-shang is now covered by the provinces of Nghe- 
an, Ihuan-hoa and Quang-nam, cfr. I , 9, II., 31. 

207) In the 7'u7i(jf kien kaiuj muh of Tcliu-hi (trad, do Mailla. vol. I. p. 
:->l 6-318) and in the An nan tchi lioh by Li-tsih of the Ming period 
(passage transl. in William Mesny's Tung kng, pp. 10-13, Hong 
Kong, 1884), the story is told at great length, being swollen with 
extraneous matters, which show how the Cliinese compilers succeed to 
expand tlie terseness of the original reports. 

208) These envoys are represented among others on one of the ten sculp- 
tured stones of Hiao t'ang shan inShan tung which date of the second 
century r, c. They are given in facsimile in the Kin shih soh (quoted 
note 187 above), but do not exhibit the same Egyptian influence as 
those of the Tzu yun shan, which were probably a survival of some of 
the Egypt i:ui data carried tliere by the sea trade several centuries earlier.. 



CHINK.- K CIVILIZATION. 45 

M. Paloologue has reproduced a few of them in his recent work Vart 
ehlnois, pp. 133, 1:35, 137, 145, and 309. 

iO'iS) Cfr. supra note 152. The matter is full of interest as it concerns at 
the same time the invention of the mariner's comj)ass. The late W. 
F. Mayor.-, in an interesting note on The Mariner' >< Compass in China 
(Notes and Queries on China and Japan, H )ng-Kong,1870, vol. IV. pp. 
;>-10) has shown that such a knowledge in China oanhe reported only to 
the time of Ma-Kiun, a famous mechanician who flourished at the court 
of Ming-ti (a. D. 227-2 40) of the Weidynasty. The lamented scholar 
thought that "several reasons exist for believing that Ma-Kiun may 
have derived his knowledge of the properties of the magnet from Ind- 
ian sources, as he probably did of the water-wheel and other inventions 
which are laid claim to in his behalf," These Indian sources would then 
be Buddhist missionaries whose propaganda was very active under that 
Northern dynasty. However the mariner's compass was not known on 
board Indian sliips as late as the Vth century. In 413 a.d. Fahien 
travelling from Ceylon to Java on a large merchant ship carrying about 
200 men, wrote :"it is impossible to know east or west except by observ- 
ing the sun, moon, or stars, and so progress. It is dark, rainy weather 
the only plan is to steer by the wind without guide." (Foh kwoh-ki, ch. 
XL. tr. Beal). And afterwards on board another ship of same size, 
from Java to China, the weather being also bad, they were in the same 
uncertainty as to their proper route. Dr. J. Edkins, on the other hand 
thinks (On Chinese names for boats and boat-gear, J. N. C. B. R. A. S. 
1877. XI. 123-14'2) that magnetic iron was known in North China at 
the time of Kwei Kutze in the I Vth century, B.C., who speaks of the 
south pointing chariots, and probably also known to Confucius, as the 
load-stone district was not far distant from the capital of the state of 
Lu, where the great philosopher was. Both learned writers have over- 
looked a most interesting statement of Liu-liiang, (80-9 B.C.) in his work 
Hung fan wii hing tch'uaji, which. I re&ume here. The Duke Hien of 
Tsiii^822-811i5.c. ) tried unsuccessfully to make south pointing chariots. 
Later on the l)uke Huan of Tsi (N. W. Shantungr684-642 B.c^found 
out the mi.stake and was successful in making some, in which himself 
and his minister Kuan-tze (note supra 177) drove. The statement is 
very suggestive of a slow progress, perhaps under foreign influence which 
reached there by the sea-trade (cfr. sect. c. of the present chapter) and 
at proximity of the region where load-stone was found. 

210) For instance the calendar of the Nere. 

2[1) Truong Vinh Ky, Cours cV histoire <(nnam'tte, vol. I., p. 11 and 27. 
Curiously enough the statement is not found in the highly embellished 
Tunghing by William Mesny, pp. 10-13, (Hong-Kong, 1884). On 
the falsificati(m and making up of the Annals of Annam, cfr. The 
languages he/ore the Chinese, sec. 89-91, and add. p. 152, of the French 
edition. 

212) And superseded by the Chinese characters. Cfr. my Beginnings of 
writing around Tibet, sec. 44. 

213) Several such writings have been made in South-western Asia, such 
as the Lolo, the Shuikia, and a third one, the name whereof is net 
known to me, but a specimen exists in a bilingual manuscrit No. 24898, 
Musde d' Ethnographic du Trocadero, Paris : M^wsso and ? — On the 



46 ORIGIN OK THK EARLY 

Lolo writing, cfr. below sec. c. of the present chapter. On the 
Shui-Kia characters, cfr my notice Anetv umting from S. W. China. 
in The Academy, 19 Febr,, 1887, n\i^ Langues de la Chine, p. 150. 
214) By a singular perversion of fables, a story has been made in the 
"Vltb century of our era, of Ambassadors from Yueh-shang sent to 
the Emperor Yao with a written calendar. Cfr. my remarks on the 
subject in The Land of Sinim, not China, pp. 184-185 of B. & O.R.,!.: 
and below Chapt. VII. answer to objections. 

e) The Trade of Shuh = Szetchuen. 
% 

We must come to several centuries later than the beginning of the 
Tchou dynasty to find the most important trade routes through the South 
and South West and West, which have really exercised a great influence 
on the development of China. Curiously enough this trade was 
carried on by non-^iinese and outside the limited Chinese dominion of 
the time. 

The traders of Sliuli, i.e., Sze-tchuen, belonged to those well gifted 
populations of an initiative spirit, who did not shrinlc from being on 
friendly terms with the civilized Bak tribes soon after their arrival in North 
West China, and to avail themselves of the benefit which an acquaintance 
with their scientific notions and arts could procure. Some legendary ac- 
counts relate that Tchang-y, a son of Nai Hwang-ti went forward to settle 
in that direction, ^15 and that several people of the Po'ng tribe brought 
books to S!iao-Hao'^^ a successor of Hwang-ti. who had remained in the 
West and did not rule in China. Arriving at more modern times, it is 
probable that the Shuh people had made use of their knowledge and en- 
tered into some intercourse with the outside world. The history of the 
country had been written byYang-hiung (b.c, 53 - a.d. 18), the celebrated 
philologist 2 iVho was himself a native of Shuh, but his work is apparently 
lost and now known only through a few quotations in other works^^^, which 
we shall refer to further on. Tlie traders of Shuh remained for long con- 
fined to the North of the Szetchuen province, and there are reasons to 
believe that they did participate to the Jade traffic by the W. route which 
we have described. (YI, b). Their country was included in the Liang- 
tchou, of the Yu-kung, which had to pay a tribute of jade; or at least from 
where or through winch Jade articles did come, at the time of the Hia and 
Shang dynasties as recorded in the Vil KungJ^^^ Much later, in 860, b.c, 
some of tlieui [iresented Jade articles to the King Y of Tchou.^-*^ and the 
sort of Jade indicates that it was Nephrite of Turkestan. It is appar 
ently to this trade extended from hand to hand wt^stwards, that western 



CHINKSE CIVILIZATIOK. 47 

Asia and afterwards Europe was indebted for the introduction of Chinese 
fruits such as the peach, the abricot, the jujube, and some others. The 
carrying westwards and eastwards of the famous mastiff-dogs of Tibet was 
also due to the same trade, at least for a part of the route, as we shall see 
directly. 

The Peach is certainly originary from China^-^, where it is cultivated 
since high antiquity, and where it so became a symbol of mariiage and of 
longevity--^. In the Brief Calendar of the Hia dynasty, which was com- 
piled not long after the twentieth century u.c.'^'^^, it is noted that on the 
sixth month the "peaches are bulled for preserves ' 224_ -p^jQ yyjjjj peach 
tree is also spoken of therein as putting forth blossoms on the first month, 
and forests or groves of peach trees--^ are mentioned in ancient literature^ ^*, 
such as the l"ao-lin, or peach-furest in Shensi W., the oldest one known, 
and afterwards others in Honan^^'', in Kiang-si^^^, &c. Now the peach in 
antiquity was not known in the west^^s^ uor was it known to the Sanskrit- 
\8peaking people migrating into India. It must have been imported from 
China between the time of these migrations, and the relations of the 
Persians with the Greeks. It was first spoken of by Theophrastus 
(332 K.C.), who mentions it as a Persian fruit, and it did not reiich Italy 
until the Christian era. It is therefore probable that this importation did 
take place before the fourth'* century ^ 3** from China, through the route of 
the Slmli traders and their intermediaries. 
[ Abricot (prunus armeniacus) is also indigenous in Ohins'^^'^, and may 
have been brought to the west by the same channel. The hing'^^-is men- 
tioned along with the t'ao=peach in the Brief Calendar of the Hia 
dynasty*^^, but it was not so much appreciated as the latter fruit, and the 
references to it in ancient literature are not so numerous^^^. In the west 
it was not known at the time of Theophrastus, but it must have been 
brought before the first century as Pliny mentions it, unless it should have 
beau already there unknown of the Greek writer. The jujube, tsao, was 
carried to the west, or at least to Persia, at a much earlier period than the 
peach and the abricot, though after the Aryan migration to India^^^. It 
is a native of the north of China^^^, and it is mentioned in the Hia calendar 
already referred to.^^^ The list will probably be increased by further 
researches on the subject. 

( The celebrated mastiff dogs of Tibet have been carried iu antiquity 
(in Babylonia as well as in China. Marco-Polo spoke of them as " big 
as donkeys. "2^^ Francois Lenormant has reproduced a slab from Baby- 
lonia where such a dog is represented with a precision which makes the 



48 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

identification certain. *^^ In China their presentation to the King of 
Tchou by some people of the West, after the overthrow of the Shang- 
yn dynasty has given a name to a book of the Shu-king.^**' Modern 
travellers have repeatedly spoken of these famous dogs.^*' The case is 
( interesting in our enquiry as instancing communications at least oc- 
; casional between a medial country, Babylouiaon the West and China on 
I, the east. In the case of China it may have been due, like the arrival 
of the trading parties of Shou-Mi, Nere and Yueh-shang, to the rising 
fame of the conquest of China, then very small, by the Tchou with 
the help of their neighbours, the non-Chinese tribes of the West and 
South West.^''^ Although the name of the Shuh traders do not appear, 
and that the party who presented the mastiffs is not given, as they are 
ilescribed only as travellers from the West, it is quite clear that coming 
from Tibet, they must h^ve passed through the country of the Shuh 
V traders ; therefore their journey cannot but be connected with this western 
trade, should they not be themselves simply a trading party from Shuh. 

Notes. 215) He dwelt near the Jo^ water. Tchuh shuh Id men, 1, Hwang- 
ti, year 77. — On relations with the Chinese in 1970 b.c. ? cfr. The lang. 
of Chin, before the Chin., sec. 118. 

216) R. K. Douglas. Chinese and Babylonian literature, 1. c. ; note 87 
sujora. — This legend is one of those which have been combined into the 
fabulous account told in the Tso-tchuen, Tchao kung, year XVII, 3 ; 
edit. Legge. Chinese classics, vol, V, p. 667. — Tradition speaks of the 
P'ongs as the first rebels subdued by Hwang-ti, and afterwards friends 
with tiie Chinese, They belonged to the same family as the Mungs 
(M6n-Tai race), cfr. Tai Piny yii Ian, Bk. 915, ff. 1-9: and my Lang. 
Chin, before Chinese, chap. IX, 

217) I have analysed his •' Comparative dictionary of dialects " in the last- 
quoted work, chap. VII. 

218) Shuh wang jien-tsi in Tai ping yil Ian, Bk. 166, ff. 3 and 10 v. 

219) Shu-king, part III, Bk. I, 69. Cfr, text supra and note 174. 

220) Tchuh shu k'i wie?i, Tchou Y wang, year II. Tlie expression used 
is Kiung yuk the finest sort of jade, that which is mentioned in the legend 
of Mull Wang and Si Wang Mu, cfr. The Tree of Life, pp. 5, 10, n. 35. 

221) As shown by Prof, A. de Candolle from various evidences; cfr. his 
C('( (,raphie Botavique raisomu'e, 1855, p, 881, and his recent smaller 

work Oriijin of cultivated ])lants, 1884:. pp. 221, 229. 
222 j Cfr. W. F. Mayers, Chinese R. M., sub, voc, Tao, p, 213, 
223) Cfr, E. C. Knobel, IS'otes on an ancient Chinese calendar, 1882. 

Above note 20. 
324) Tchu Cao y wet tou shih; in the Ta Y-li, Hia siao tcheng, Vlth month. 
The same calendar as edited and translated by Prof, R. K. Douglas, 
The calendar of the Ilia dynasty, p, 44 (Orientalia Antiqua, I, 1882) 
Nay.s only Tchu t'ao ' Boiled are tlie peaches '; the other words y wei tou 



CHINKSK CIVILIZATION. 49 

shih, litterally ' to make dislies of fruits ' are not there. 

225) Called ("o fan or /j-fau, the first character having the two readings. 
Prof. Douglas, I.e. p. 26, translates mountain peach tree. 

226) Spoken in the ,SJiii-/c/iig, Part, V, Wu tcheng 2. It was situated 
ahout the hill of Kw'a fu in the S.C. of the present department of T'ung- 
tchou. Cfr. J. Legge, Chinese classics, vol. Ill, p. 309, note. The 
same statement is found in the Shan hai King. In the Tai ping yi) 
Ian encyclojiedia of 983, in Bk. 967 ff. 1-8, there is no less than 1% 
references to the neach fmm ancient literature. 

227) G. Playfair, The Cities and Towns of China, No. 4400. 

228) Tai ping yii Ian, Bk. 967, fol. 3. 

-29) The present statement and the followings are derived from Dr. A. 
de Candolle, Geographie botanique and Origin of cultivated plants, I.e. 

230) We have spoken below of the introduction of the China peach into 
India at a later date. 

231) De Candolle, origin, pj). 215-218. 

-*32) Not sing as by misprint in Bretschneider, on the study and value of 

Chinese botanical tco?-ks, {i. 10. 
233; Hia siao tcheng, 1, 21, and IV, 54; P. R. Douglas, o.c. 

pp. 26, 37. 
234) 2'ai ping yii Ian, Bk. 968, ff. 1-3. Among the quotations given 

there, one of the Vth. cent, refers to' apricot trees in Khotan, and 

another supposed to be earlier, speaks of an island where apricots grow, 

in the sea south of Shantung. 
-'35) A de Candolle. Origin, pp. 194-196. 

236) A de Candolle. ibid. p. 196. 

237) Hia siao tcheng. Vlllth month 93 ; R. R. Douglas, o.c. p. 48. 

238) H. Yule, Marco-Polo, 2nd edit., vol. II, p. 41. 

239) In his work : La latigue PrimiVwe de [a chaldee, pi., p. 383, from 
a terra cotta fragment found .it Babylon. At the time of the Akliae- 
menides, similar dogs were brouglit up in four villages of Babylonia, 
according to Herodotus, who calls them Indian, I, 192. Ktesias 
has described them, 5 and fragm. VI. Cfr. Ancient India as des- 
cribed by Ktesias the Knidtan, by J. W. McCrindle, (1882), pp. 9 and 
36. Also W. Houghton. Mammalia of the Assyrian inscriptions, 
Tr. S.B.A., 1877, vol. V. 

240) Liu ngao. Part, V, BkV. in J. Legge, Chinese classics, vol. Ill, p. 345. 

241) Such as G. Bogle in 1774. Manning in 1812, (Mar-kham, Tibet, 
pp, 88, 224) ; T. T. Cooper. P. Drand, (H. Yule, Marco Polo, 
I.e.; Capt. W. Gill, The Hirer of Golden Sand, (1880), vol. I, p. 
382 ; vol. II, pp. 151. 247. 

242) These tribes are enumerated in the Shu-k ing, Part, V, Bk. II 
The Tchou were represented in China wi th i^ d hair. On their foreign, 
origin, cfr. Les langues de la Chine, addit. p. 160. 

243) Si Liii. The latter word (3837 of Basile) is not the proper nam« 
of a tribe, and means simply in that case, stranger, traveller, as in 
Mencius. Cfr. W. Williams, S.D. p. 559 ; J. Eitel, Ch. CD., p. 
390 ; sub. voc. 



50 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

Tlie traders of Shuli in their mercantile expeditions followed three 
routes going to the west, to the south-west and the south. 

There was a routeto Tibet_ and tlie west or south-west which, ap 
parentlj starting from Tcheng-tu, passed through Darchiendo (Chinese Ta- 
tsen-lu), as in the present day,^^ and then bifurcated to the N, W. and 
to the S. W. The North route thither must liave bent its direction to the 
N. W. and following South of the Kuenlun range crossed to the country 
of the Jade, the Khotan region. This is a mere inference from the data 
we have just enumerated. We have no other evidence to add in its favour 
nor as to the date when it ceased to be used, after the presentation 
to the Chinese court of Jade articles from Turkestan in 860 B.C. which 
we have described. The S. W. route starting from Darchiendo west- 
wards passing through Litang, Batang, Kiangka, and then in a S. W. 
di recti )n probably through Roema, Sadiya,'^^ and the course of the 
Bmhmaputra, reacheA on the Ganges the important mart (jf Pataliputra 
(or Patna) which became the capital city of the celebrated Asoka (263— 
224 B.C.) This is the road spoken of afterwards by Tchang-Kien 123 
B.c.,^*^ and by the unknown author of the Periplus^'*'^ two hundred 
years later. 

Tchang-kien was sent in 135 b.c, by Han Wu Ti on the track of the 

Yueh-ti, former neighbours in the N. W. of China, who had migrated 

westwards in 165 b. c.,^'*^ in order to secure their alliance against the 

common foes the Hiung-nus ; he arrived in the Ta-Hia country,249 or 

Bactria in 125 b.c, after being a prisoner among the latter for over ten 

years, and there he saw, some cloth from Shuli, otherwise silk-cloth from 

modern central Szetchuen, and some bamboo staves from K iung,^^'^ a 

western part of the same modern province ; lioth articles, he was told 

were brought in Ken-tu, i.e. Hindu = India,-'5i \jy tjjeir own traders when 

going to that country which lay several thousand // to the south-east. 

The acute Chinaman was unaware of the existing intercourse between 

Shuh and India, but he estimated rightly that witli reference to the Middle 

kingdom, India was situate in the South-west, and therefore that some 

communication could be established in that direction as we shall see further 

on. It is to be remarked that Tchang-kieng does not allude at all to 

any trade of any sort through Tibet and Badakshan, which existed no 

more in his time, as otherwise he would undoubtedly have mentioned it, 

and his views would not have been solely directed to the establishment 

of an intercourse between Bactria and China through India, as we shall 

see further on. The scanty trade which as we have seen, the Shuh traders 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 51 

(lid carry in olelen times by tlie NoHli liadlong died out from the difficulties 
of the way, and tlie opening uf new markets in India tlirough tlie South 
western routes. It was after tlie return of the ChiiKxc minister and his 
reports on the wealth <if the countries West of the Tsungling mountains, 
that trade by the North began only to be regularly carried. 

The anonymous writer of the Periplus, a.d. 80-89. has a remarkable 
passage on this trade. ^52 " Beyond this region {Khruse, i.e. Indo-China), 
immediately under the North, where the sea terminates outwards, there 
lies somewhere in T h i n a a very great city,— not on the coast, but in the 
interior of the country, called Thina, from which silk, whether in the raw 
state or spun into thread and woven into cloth is brought by land througli 
Bactria to Barugaza (Bharoch), or by the Ganges river to Limurike 
^^^ (^Dimyrike, the Tamul country, Malabar)."' The author speaks of 
^erlon serikon and of neina serikon ; and in another passage he mentions 
furs (Jermata serika as exported from Barbarik(jn, a mart on the middle 
and only navigable branch of the Indus, -^"^ wlure they must have been 
brought from the same country as the other articles, i.e. from the S eric a. 
Pliny, somewhat earlier, mentions^^^ the Seres sending their most ex- 
cellent iron along with vestments and fiirs.^^^ Ptolemy, is his turn, a 
century later, says'-^^ that there was not only a road from the country of 
the Seres and of the Sina? to Bactriane by the Stone Tower, (i.e. by 
Kashgar and Pamir), but also a road to India Avhicli came through Pal- 
imbothra (i.e. Patnaj. The latter route is therefore that which was 
followed by the merchants from Shuh for their trade with India, and until 
the reopening of the North route, was during several centuries the way 
of communications between the West and the non-Chinese Szetchuen, and 
by rebound the Middle Kingdom. I am not in a position to say that 
this West-south route, or another South route whereof we shall speak 
further on, was opened shortly after the time of the mercantile expedition 
to the court of Tching Wang.^^s It is probable, but we shall not see any 
influence coming through them before the sixth century ;'59 ^g to historical 
facts we do not find any before the fourth century. 

At that time the wealth of Szetchuen had accrued considerably in con- 
sequence of its foreign trade and made it a desirable acquisition for its 
powerful neighbours, in the North the slate of Ta n, modern sound Ts''in, 
in Shensi, future conqueror of the whole Chinese dominion, and on the 
East the non-Chinese state of Tsii, })robably old Tseru, which was not 
yet half-sinicised in Hukwang. 

The history of the kings of Sliuh by Yang-hiung^^o^ which I have 



/ 



52 ORIGIV OF THE EARLY 

already alluded to, gives the names of several rulers who had establishep 
their power iu the capital^''^ After the lapse of three periods called 
Ts'au tsiimj, Tcheh kuan and Yfi y, a certain Kai ming was ruling in 
the latter part of the fourth centurv^^-. His successors were Feb yung 
Yli-wei, and T'u-yii. The latter, who had come from India^^^, assumed 
the title of king, and was ruling circa 255 b.c.^®*, but 1 e was induced to 
resign, according to probabilities, under the increased pressure of the kings 
of Ts'in, then all powerful. The latter had begun long before to show 
their strong hand in these regions. Prince Hwuy, who did not assume 
the Royal dignity before 324 B.C., had conquered in 328 B.C. the region 
called Pa tchung, corresponding to the modern piefectnre of Tchung 
King in E. Szetchuen. Five years afterwards, as king of Ts'in, he sends 
his prime minister, Tchang-y, to attack the Shuh^^^. Kai-ming, who was 
then on the throne, tried vainly to resist, and being vanquished, withdrew 
to Wu-yang, the modern Kia-ting fu, where he was made a prisoner soon 
ajterwards. It was only later on^"^, namely, about 218 b.c, and in order 
to facilitate their communications, that Ts'ix She Huang-ti, the founder 
of the Chinese Empire, constructed the famous five-feet causeway through 
the Tsing Hug range, which hitherto liad been a natural barrier, pre- 
venting any serious extension towards the South^*'^. Previously tj the 
establishment of this route the supreiuacy of the kings of Ts'in, which was 
only teuiporary, in those regions was nothing more than a sort of pro- 
tectorate, the government remained in the hands of the native chiefs, who 
preserved their hereditary rights^''*^, and were entitled to receive royal 
princesses in marriage^ ^'^. 

But it gave to the Ts'ins the right of passage for their traders and fur 
, their troops ; and it permitted them to thwart the projects of the non- 
Chinese^^*^ great State of Tsu, tlie kings whereof had been attracted like 
themselves towards Ssetchuen and the south-west, and bet-'an their inove- 
^ ^^ ments in that direction sometime earlier. They had gradually absorbed 

several minor states which laj' on their western borders. About 330 B.C. 
the king Wei of Tsu^^^ sent Tch\\ang-Kiao with troops up the (Yaug- 
tse) Kiang to settle the boundaries of the several tribes from Pa and 
Kien tchung^^^ westward, and attach them to his kingdom. The gallant 
general proceeded further on and reached the lake of Yunnan which was 
then called the Tsen niarsh^^^; he overawed the inhabitants of the country 
by his military strength, and attached them also to the kingdom of Tsu. 
But the army of Ts'in ci;t his con_iifl.unications in the rear, seizing, as we 
have said above, the districts of L'a and Ivicu-tchung, which lie had sub- 
mitted, and prevented his return to his native country. ••The highway 



CHINKSE CIVIMZ.VTloK. 

being thus rendered impassable, Tclnvang-kiao remained witli liis followers 
and established himself as king- of T s e n, assuming the garb of the 
barbarians and adopting their customs, he was accepted as their chief «''4"- / 

NoTKS. 244) Routes die hard in mountainous and unexplored lands, and 
the route here indicated is still said to be the only one permitted by the 
orograpliy of the country. Therefore it was })robably that which was 
followed in antiquity. Cfr. note 826 iufr. 

245) Tiie route is indicated by the geographical conditions of the country, 
anji that which has been severally attempted by European travellers 
wlio could not go through because of the war-like and savage disposi- 
tions of the native tribes. 

246) Szema Tsien, ,57*^ H, Bk. 123, fol. ; Pan ku, Tsien Han Shu, 
Bk. 61, Biography of Trhnnq kien. 

247) Peripl, Mar. 'Erythr., 64. J. W. McCrimllc, TAt? Commerce and 
Navigation of the Eri/threan Sea (Bombay, 1879), pp. 12-13 
and 148. 

248) Cfr. my paper The Yueh-t' and the Early Buddhist Missionaries in 
China, p. 5. 

249) This is an important datum for the connexion of ancient geography 
and ethnology in the cuneiform documents and the Chinese annals. 
The TijJiia of the Chinese are the Daai of N^^fii'sia mentioned by / 
Herodotus I, 125 : the Deaye of Ezra, IV, 9 : the I)_ahae whom 
Sennakherib vanquished in 697, he seized their capital Ukjiii, aud their 
King Maniya fled before him. Cfr. E. Norris, Assyrian dictionary, I, 
212 ; Prof. E. Schrader in F. von Richt.)fen, China, 441 n.; G. de 
Vasconcellos-Abreu, De V origine probable des Toukhares, pp. 176-179 
(Le Museon, 1883, t. IT.) — The Tahia or Daai must be carefully 
distinguished from the Tokhariand from the Yueh-ti as shown by 
the latter scholar. Richtofen I.e., and A. Cunningham Coins of the 
Indo -Scythians (Numismatic Chronicle, 1888, vol. VIII) have not 
avoided these confusions of ancient osientalists. Sennaherib had sub- 
dued the T uk ha ri in his preceeding campaign, which directed more 

to the North. 

250) K i u n g was properly the name of a hill, producing bamboos with 
long joints and solid hearts, fit for making staves. A, Wylie. 

251) The primitive text of Tchang-kien gave that spelling accordingly 
with the name as he heard it pronounced in the N. of Persia. It was 
corrected afterwards into She n-t u under the influence of Buddhist 
priests from India. Cfr. the gloss in Szema Tsien's Shehi, I.e. 

25-J) The connection of the Greek report with that of the Chinese minister, 
not general, of Hak Wu-ti, has been shown by Col, H. Yule in his 
most valuable Essay introductory to Capt. GilCs journey ' The River 
of Golden Sand' (1880), p. 32. 

253) Peripl. Mar. Erythr, 64 ; McCrindle, o.c. pp. 147-148. 

254) Ibid. 39 ; McCrindle, o.c. p. 109, note. Some nema serika was 
also brought to Barbarikon as sta ted in the same passage. 

255) Plin. Hist. nat. xxxiv. 41. Dr. J, Edkins has recently published 
in the Journal of the Peking Oriental Society, 1885, vol. I, pp. 1-16, 
a paper on Allusions to China in Pllny^ snatural history. 

256) In the Mahdbhdrata, II, 50, quoted by Lassen, among the presents 




^ 



54 ORIGIN OF THE EAKLY 

sent to Yudhislithira by the S a k a, T u s h ar n, and K a n k a skins 
are enumerated. 

*2o7) Ptolem. I, 17, circa a.d. loU. — McCrindle, Ancient India as des- 
cribed by Ptolemy, (Bombay, 18S5), p. 30.— Col. H. Yule, Cathay and 
the 10 II thither, vol. I, introd. pp. 140-153 has collected from Ptolemy 
and annotated all that concerns this subject. 

■258) Which we have reported above. 

259) Cfr. below, sect. ***** of the present chapter. 

260 I Shuh Wang pen lei. I quote it from some extracts in the Tal ping 
yii Ian (a.d. 983), Bk. 16G, ff. 3, 10. As the matter has never been 
treated, as far as we know, in any European work, I am compelled to 
speak at a greater length than I would do otherwise. 

261) The modern Tcheng-tu as called since -21 B.C. and then pronounced 
Than h-t u. It was previ<msly Kwei-tcheng or the Tortoise city 
according to the Lung Shuh i^in in the Shiooh ling collection, 
Bk. II, f. 9. 

^Q'l) The same name appears in the Shan ha'i ling, Bk. XI, ff. 2-4, but 
so much fabled, that historical truth has disappeared under the be- 
wildering garb. 

263) The text says that he was orii^inary from the Tien fo mountains. 
The name (1798-1716 of Basile) is one of the many Chinese equiva- 
lents for Shindu or India. 

564) A short notice of him is given in Maj^er's Chinese R.M., I, 685, 
where it is said that he was styled Wang T i. He resigned his 
throne and retired in the Wu mountains of the West, inconsequence 
of fabulous circumstances reported in his legend, but more probably for 
the reason put forth in the text above. 

265) Shuh Wang jx^n ki, I.e. Bk. 166, f. 10 v. The date of this event 
is pretty well ascertained from a concatenation of circumstances. Prince 
jJwuy made himself king in the year 324 ; and the officer he sent 
against Shuh was Tchang-y who was in his service between the years 
330-3 -o ; therefore it must be in 324-3. '3 that the campaign took place 
Tchang-v on whose life cfr. W. F. Mayers, Chinese R.M., I, 17. 

266) Szema Tsien, She h\ Bk. 116, fob -'.— Panku, Tsien Han shu, 
Bk. 95 ; transl. A. Wylie, Iliston/ of the South Western Barbarians, 
p. 4 in Journal of the Anthropological Institute, August 1879. 

267) The entire route is a work of tremendous engineering, says Banm 
von Bichtofen, in Col. H. Yule, Marco-Polo. vol. II, p. 26. It ex- 
tended from the river Hwai opposite the district city of Pao-ki, to 
within a few miles of the Han river, near the prefectural cit}?^ of Han- 
tchnng, (A. Wylie). It is curious that local tradition should attribute 
the authorship of this great work to wrong men. In Shensi, it is Lin 
pang the founder of the First Han dynasty in : 06 li.c. ; in Szetchuen 
it is the great man of the country, Liu-pi the founder of the Third 
Han dynasty at Tcheng-tu in 226 a.d. It is possible that Liu pang 
had it repaired but he did not establish it, as the statement of Swrna 
Tsien is quite precise, and it existed previously ten years or more. 

268) For instance in 255 b.c. King Tch'ao siang made a treaty with 
some chiefs of the Pa region, modern Tchung king, which was engraved 
on stone. Cfr. Hou Han Shu, Bk. 116, Fan Tun ; transl. A. Wylie, 
History of the Southern and South Western Barbarians, p. 222, iu 
Bevuede TExtreme Orient, 1882, 1. 1. 

269) Hou Han Shu, Bk. 116, Fa Nan ; A. Wylie, ibid. p. 220. 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 55 

270) On this state and its non-Cbinese linguistic characteristics, cfr. 

The Languages of China before the Chinese, sect. 31-33, 96-98 ; and 

in the French edition, addition p. 148. 
211) Szema Tsien, She Ki, Blc. 116, f. 2.— King Wei ruled from 339 

to 328 B.C. 

272) Corresponding to W. Hunan, E. Szetshuen and N. Kueitchou 
provinces. 

273) This name which is now decayed into Tien is still the litterary ap- 
pellative of the province of Yunnan. 

*274) Szema Tsien, She ki, I.e. ; in Wylie's translation J.A.L, I.e. p. 4. 



^ 



CHINKSK CIVILIZATION. 55 



e) The trade of Shuh^Szetchuen. 
III. 

After 320 b.c. the subjects of the Than, modern Ts'iri, rulers had 
therefore a footing in the Shuh country, and could have a hand in the 
foreign commerce which was carried there; but we do not know how far 
they availed themselves of their opportunities. They certainly did so to a 
certain extent, and were enabled to get some geographical information on 
the regions of the south, and especially the region of the modern Burma. 
Some documents have existed about a route or routes from Ta Thanh, 
modern Ta Tshn, as it was called at the time of its dominion^'s, and 
Indo-China, compiled apparently at the beginning of the Han dynasty; 
but they have been misunderstood by a Chinese compiler uf about 350 a.d. 
who has applied them tj another purpose, and they have reached us in 
such a garbled and mixed up condition that it would be an invidious and 
dangerons task to draw any inference of positive geography out of them. 
It is one of the nost curious cases of misgivings in the system of mosaic 
literary work known as Chinese composition ^ ''6. 

As we have just said, a clear indication of this trade route is the 
geographical knowledge which was gained through it. In the Xtli book 
of the Shan hal Ktng^'^'', an interpolated passage of circa 210 b.c. mentions 
the Kwei-Un region^'s and afterwards the Peh-Ui. country, the Li-ni 
country, the Tijio-ti country, and the Peh-ku country, all southwards of 
the Yu river, which is a southern affluent of the Canton river^^a. Now 
all these names are, descriptive of peculiar customs; Ze-n/=Parted- 
years, rt'aof/=tattoed foreheads, or ethnic names, Peh-lu,=Fra,j 
and Plow, Peh-tu=Fgh.o and Pegu, all formerly of the country which 
is now Burma^so. A later work mentions tin as one of the products of 
the country of Peh-lu, sold to foreigners^si; and this Peh-lu is ap- 
parently the same as that we have just quoted from the Canon of the 
Hills and Eivers or Shan Hal King. 



[}^', ORIGIN oi- THE p:arly 

Therefore at the time of the preponderance of the Than or Ts' i n, i.e., 
after 820 until 209 B.C., and probably earlier, a trade-route had existed 
towards the south-west, passing through the principalities of Szetchuea 
and Yunnan, notably through Yung-tchang in the W. of latter province, 
and hence by one of the two rivers, the Salwen or the Irawaddy, arriving 
to the smporia on the coast of Pegu-^^. We know from several tes- 
timonies, concurring to the same statement, that the coast of Pegu, wag 
for centuries a seat of commercial activity, An ancient Hindu colony, 
Hindaic, not Buddhist, of merchants from Orissa under the lead 
of T a p h u s s a and B h a 1 1 i k a had been founded in the Vth century 
B.C., in U k k a lama nd a 1 a283^ which comprised the region S. and 
S.W. of the extreme Pegu yoma range^^'*. Tiie foundation of the 
Shwe Dagon pagoda of Rangoon is attributed to them. 

According to the Mahd Rajdiceng or Royal histcry of Burma, 
with till reserve due to its trustworthiness, the upper pait of the country 
had been colonised from India even before that time. AbhirajTi, ruler of 
Kapilavastu^^^, abandoned his country and crossing the mountaina 
eastward, founded about 300 years before the time of Gautama, a new 
kingdom with the capital at Tagoung, on the left bank of the 
Irawaddy, in about 23° 30' N. lat. Wliile Gantama Buddha wag 
alive, i. e. circa 515-435 B.C., a second band of Kshatriyas from Gangetic 
India arrived led by Daza Raja, and settled east of the Irawaddy^^^. The 
thirty-second successor of Abhiraja, named Bhiennaka, and the last king 
of his dynasty, who lived about the commencement of the religious 
Buddhist era, was driven away by invaders from his capital, the old 
Pagan, which they destroyed, near Tagoung, and compelled to take refuge 
at Malei, on the right bank of the Irawaddy, and nearly opposite the 
present remains of Lower Tsampenago^*^^. These invaders had (;ome from 
a country to the east called G a n d a 1 a r i t^^s, in the land of T s i n or 
Sin, which corresponds with Yunnan. -^^ Should the last name be con- 
temporary of the event, and the " about tlie commencement of the religious 
era" indicate as it seems probable a somewhat later date, 2^'' namely the 
third century before the Christian era, if not later, we might have in this 
record a link with the genuine hi.-tory of Yunnan which we have recorded. 
The Kingdom of Tsen had been established in 330 B.C., and it is very 
probable that the rulers of that state, enterprising as we know they were, 
have attempted if not succeeded to establish their sway towards the south- 
west of their dom'nion, aid therefore have advanced eventually as far as 
the Old Pagan. This place, in some accounts was also called T z i n d u e, 



CHINESE CIVIMZ.VTION. 57 

*^i and it seems that, this name was known to tlie traders of S.W. China 
^in the second century bot'oro our ora.^^- 
C Anyhow, in the tliird century r,.c., the region of modern Burma must 
<, have been largely occupied with Hindu colonists ; it was deemed of suffici- 
ent importance to be numbered among the nine realms where Buddhist 
missions ought to be sent ; ami after the great council held ubout 21-1 
B.C. in the monastery of Agokarama at Patna, Sona and Uttara were dis- 
patched to Snvanna bhumi,-^^ and according to probabdities, they 
landed at G o 1 a n a g a r a,^^^ north of T h a t u n. 

We have now carried our historical investigatiijn about the possi- 
(bilities of intercourse between Shuh and the South and South-west, as 
/ late as the third century before our era. This period ought to be later 
than is required for the immediate purpose of the present work. The 
events of the two centuries which follow, are however so important in his- 
torical results and in clearer and more jirecise information on the matter, 
that we are compelled to examine them, l)efore jn'oceeding to our survey <jf 
the importation of western notions and idt^as which have reached the Mid- 
die Kingdom through the S.W. channels. 

Notes. .:75) In the Shan hai kiiu/, we find 7\, Thanh, i.e. Ta Ts'in, Ta 
Tsit, &c. 

27(5) I refer to the description of 'fa 'Tsm in the Wei l/'oh by Yli-huan 
of the IVth centurv. a large part whereof refers distinctly to the old 
Ta Than {Ta r.vn) of N. W. China, and to T h Iv t u n near 
Martabau, and dates from the short period of the :?7ur'/ = Ts'in supre- 
macy ; it was mixed up with data of later date concerning Dakshina or 
South India and the Ta Ts'in of further West. Tchang Kien knew 
nothing of Ta Ts'in. The description I discuss contains whole state- 
ments from the Shan hal ting, (cf. II. iU, XIII, 1 and XVI, 4 of this 
work with sect. 77 of the descrii)tion) which have crept into :dl the 
notices subsequently compiled, from the Hciu Ha7i Shu downwards. 
The svmbol T'sin. which as I have shown in another paper (^ <|- O.R., 
I, 46), was formei'ly 2'han and in that capacity had been used to trans- 
cribe the names of Ta Tlia n, laler Ta Tiin, of X.W. China, and of 
Thatun. later Sadun near Martal)nn. was grailually decayed to T.'dn 
and in the latter value, was employed in the fourth century, with the 
same other sign t < great, for the notation of the name of 1) a k s h i n a 
or S. India. C. tr. the Chinese version of the Samanta-jtrahhasa-mtf-a, 
early work like the Lalitavistara, by Tchu Fahu or Dharmaraksha, P'tir- 
i/ao k iig, in '308 a.d., Ill, 7, fol. 5. — \nother transcription for the same 
name was employed (Eitel, Sanskrit-^ 'hi nese dictiowtry, sub. voc.) 
afterwards, by Fang-yen and others but in that concerns the earliest 
reports the evil was done, and a case of error existed henceforth for 
future compilers. Much confusion has been brought about in Chinese 
documents by resemblances of names, and the use of well-known appel- 



58 uRi(;i\ of TiiK eai;ly 

latives t'ur uauies iie\vly-he;iril of. because of a temporary and approximate 
similarity in sound, fancied by tlie transcriber according to his time and 
his own dialectal peculiarities. In the descriptions of Ta T'sin which 
the Chinese compilers have wrongly looked upon as that of one and 
unique country, there are several cases of such confusions and the result 

f lias been an inextricii-ble entanglement. Dr. F. Hirth in his learned 

^ work China and the Roman Orient, Researches into their Ancient and 
and Mediaeval relations as represented in old Chinese records, Shan- 
ghai, 1885, has published all these texts with translations and comments; 
but he has not recognized the extracts therein from the Shan hal king', 
he luis premised that Ta T'sin applied to the Reman Orient only, 
and was shifting in the records accot ding to the geographical knowledge 
of tlie time ; with a considerable amount of learning and mgenuity 
which deserved better subject and success, he has attempted the im- 
possible task of making many names fit countries and towns of Anterior 
Asia.— I find in my own notes that the name Tn^l^'sin refers to live 
different countries ; Ansih to two ; Tiao-tchi to tliree ; Li-kien to three; 
and so forth. With leference to the old_j.outh trade-route and the 
documents about it which have been merged with later data concerning 
tlie Roman Orient or Ta T'sin in the Wei lioh, I remark the following- 
names : T s i h-s h i h {Shan hot king, II, 20, XI, 3 : Legge, Shu 
king, pp. 127, VdA \ M. Guelny, Description de la Chine oicidentale, 
Museon^ 1885, IV, 018-9) ; Hien and Tu in S. Szetchuen fcfr. 
Matouanlin, Lthnographie, transl. D'Hervey, 1, 37, 5G, 21, 175) : 
Ki-Ju, not Sze-J'u,\s. o-i\\, in Yueh sui S. Szetchuen (Mat(manlin, I.e. 
147) ; Sze-tao in W. Kucitchou; Tsie-Ian, E. of Tsun-y, Kueitchou 
(Matouanlin, I.e. l-4);^4-;/U7?? = Ho-man of W.Yunnan (Matouanlin, 
I.e. 195) ; Tiao-tchi=lL i a o-t i of Upper Burma ; Li-kien=ili a k h a i n g, 
modern Arakan (A. P. Phayre, History of Burma, \). A\)\ Sze-lo=:. 
S a d a, S. of Rakhaing. (Col. H. Yule, Oldest Records of the sea 
route to China, p. 5; Proc. R. G. S., Nov, 1882); Sze-])in = 8 alio n a 
of Ptolemy = Suvarna (Lassen, in McCrindle's Ptolemy, p. 199); Ta 
Than later Ta Tsin, = T h a t u n, a local form (Phayre, o.c, 1». 24) 
of Saddhamma(Dr. Em. Forchammer, Notes I, 21ie Slave Dagon Pagod'iy 
pp. 3, 17) ; Ansih, at proximity of Tun-sun = Tennasserim [Liang shv., 
Bk. .54) = Andhra on the East coast of India ; a4?/A-» = A n g li a 
of the same region ; }'M-/n = Udra, modern Orissa : Z;/-^<'« = T a p- 
robane or Ceylon and its flying bridge of 2;jO li across the sea, ^ 
the P)ridge of Rama ; and some others. — On 'Jlte Chinese name of the 
Roman emjiire, cfr. my note in The Academy, 1 Oct., 1881 ; and Pi'of. 
Hcuri Cordier, in Melanges Graux, il88i, pp. 719-721, J9f' Voriglne 
des noms que les ch nois ont donnes a V Em/)ire Romain. 

277) Shan hal king, Bk. X. fol. 1 r. On this curious work cfr. note 
91, supra. 

278 ; The entry of this name which existed as a geographical ajipellative 
after 214 B.C. until the year 204 b.c when it was conquered by the king 
of Nan-yueh, who was recognised as such and as a vassal of the Han 
dviuisty in 196 B.C. The years 214-204 n.c. or little afterwards are 
therefore the ]ieriod of the composition of the notice. 

279) A. K. Colquhouu, Across Chryse, vol. I. 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 59 

280) All iiiuncs a,iul oustoui-; found still among tlio Kiuvngs. Cfr. Major 
Spearman, The BvitisJi Burma Gazi'ttecr, vol. I. p]i. 162-173 ; also 
Col. A. R. MoMalion, The Karens of the Golden Chersonese (1876), 
p. -t:) sq. Anil my Lang, he/ore Chin., sect. 145-149. 

281) The Fu-tuin tn ha l)v Kang-tai. (|Uoted in the Tal /ntu/ i/H hm 
(1)83) Blc. 789, Fol. H r/ 

282) This r.iute was again used in the ?econ<l and third century of our 
era, as described in F. Hirth. Chimt and the Ronidn Orient, p. 179. 
In the IIoii Hiin Shu Bk. 116, (transl. Wylie, Rev. Extr. Orient, p. 
2:^4 ; also F. Hirth, o.c, pp. 36, 179 j a state of Than or Tan, pro- 
bably not distant from Yung-tchang, is recorded as having relations 
with the Chinese court in a.d. 97, and presenting to the Emperor in 
liO A.D. si>me musicians and jugglers, whose feats are described, from 
Thatun (written 7\i Than) a country in the S.W. with which the 
Shan ov Tan had intercourse. M. Talboys Wheeler, the historian of 
India, has told me thut the natives of South Burma are still most 
clever in the same tricks as those described by the Chinese annalist. On 
Thatun, cfr. note 276. 

283) Utkalas was the classical name of the inhabitants of Orissa, E. 
India. 

284) Cfr. Em. Forchhammer, Notes on the Earlif Jdstnrti a^cd geography 
of British Burma, I. (Rangoon, i883),'pp. 6, il, 12, 14 and 16. The 
author mentitms, p. 6, that names occur in the geography of British 
Burma which are originally not Pali but Sanskrit, and suggestive more 
of ethnical and historical relations witli Hinduic India than with Budd- 
liism. U<>1. H. Yule has long before made the same remark. Cfr. liis 
Sources and authorities in Dr. Smith's Atlas; and his Notes on the oldest 
records of the sea route to China (Proc. R.G.S. 188l^) p. 11. Both 
scholars have remarked the transfer which has taken place of many 
Indian names to Indo- China. 

285) Or Kapilanagara, the birth-place of Buddha Gautama, identified 
by Gen. Alex. Cunningham with Nagar on the Upper Manurama or 
Cuni tributary of the Gogra. Cfr. his Ancient geof/raphi/ of India, p. 
414 sq. — Abhiraja is said to have fled before the invasion of his country 
by the king of Kauthala or Oudh. (Dr. J. Anderson, M and at ay to 
Momien, pp. 26-27.) The Maha liajdweng says, the king of Pen g-zi- 
1 a-r i e t (Major Spearman, British Burma G<izetteer, 1, p. 286.) 

28G) On the ruins of T a g o u n g, cfr. Sir A. P. Phayre, History of 
Barnn, 1883, pp. 14-15, and Ur. J. Anderson, Report on the Ex- 
pedition to Western Yunnan, 1871, p. 206. Little of them is apparent 
at first sight, but explorations and excavations there would disclose 
certainly some most important data. Dr. Em. Forchhammer, archa?o- 
logist of the government of Burma, has just made an exploration of the 
magnificent ruins of New Pagan, and discovered some wonderful 
antiquities. Cfr. Col. Yule Remains of Pagan, and Dr. Forchhammer's 
letter in Trubners Record, 1889, IlIrd s. No. 1, pp. 3-4; also Yule's 
Mission to Ar ', 1858, p. 33 ; Howard Malcom, Trarelsin the Bur man 
Empire, •^wuQ 27, 1836. 1 hough Pagan is reported to have been 
built a long while after T a g o u n g, namely in the seventh century of 
our era, (^Burma Gazetteer, p. 249; we may expect from Dr. Forch- 
hammer's explorations some important dis' losures on the inflation of the 



80 



ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 



Mahd Rajaweng iu respect to tlie date of foundation cf the first town. 

2.S7) Cfr. Burma Gazetteer, I, p. l36 ; Pliajre, ox. p. 8; Ney Elias, 
Introductory sketch of the histor// of the Shcms, p, 12. 

288) Gandalaritis one of the many instances of transfer of the 
classical localities of Indian Buddhism to Indo-China, which is current 
in Burma. For the Buddhist horizon in the latter country, Yunnan 
represents Gandhara, the country about Peshawar, and is still so 
styled in state documents of Burma [Gandalant). Cfr. Col. H. Yule, 
Marco Polo 2 ed., II, p. 59, and An endeavour to elucidate Rishiduddiris 
yeographical notices of India, J.R.A.S. ?>..«., vol. IX, p. 35G. Cfr. also 
note 284 supra. 

28'J") Same authorities as note 287 all quoting the Mahd Edjdwevg. 

290) Bhiennaka was the 32nd ruler after Abiiiraja who lived 300 years 
before Gaudama, let us say about 775 b.c. Now 33 reigns at an 
average of 15 years each make a total of 495 years, leaving 280 b.c. 
as a possible date for the recorded expedition from Tsen. 

291) Thindue with the Burmese /A is nearly rc/nc/y/t' which we have 
quoted in tlie text in oider to avoid any misconception, cfr. Ney EHas, 
o.c. p. 11. 

292) Cfr. below, end of section IV. 

293) T. W. Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 227. 

294) Em. Firchhamiiier, Notes I; The first Buddhist Missionto Suvanna 
hhumi, pp. 1-6, and 10. 

e) IV. 

At the fall of the Than=(Ts'in) dynasty, 209 u.c. and the disorders 
which ensued, the allegiance to the Chinese government ceased to be 
recognised in the W. and S. W. of modern China proper ; these countries 
were released and the ancient roads through Shuh were reopened," 
and "by this traffic the communities became wealthy and prosperous. ^^^ 
...The four regions of Pa and Shuh had free comnmnication with tlie 
Barbarians . n the south and west, and by the interchange of com- 
modities, were able mutually to supply their res2:)ective wants. '"^^'' 

Tlic II an dynasty which had succeeded that of Than=Ts'in was too 
imicli engaged in repelling the attacks of the Hiung-nus iu the North 
to lake any intere.st in the S.W., and they had left everything there go 
adrift. It was only after 130 b.c, under the powerful rule of Wu-ti, 
that some efforts were made in that direction ; the Kin// of Kien-wei 
was established or supposed to be so on the country connecting modern 
Hunan, Szetchuen ami Kweitchou with its centre near the modern Kia- 
ting fu, and the regions of Ki un g and Ts o h W. of Szetchuen^^^ recog- 
niv.ed the Chinese supremacy, the meagre resources of the Empire n()t 
permitting to do anything further."'^'' At that time it was learned by the 
Chinese that a country named Shin-tu h was situated about 2000 //to 
the West of Kiung.299 When Tchang Kjeii returned in 123 b.c. from 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 6l 

his mission to the Yueh-ti, he urged his govoriiment to estahh'sli com- 
mnnioations witli Bactria through India. Tho North route was stopped 
by the Hiung-nus, and it was not possible to pass tlirough the Kiang^*^ 
i.e. the Tibetan tribes, who were inimical ; so that he recommended to go 
straight through from Shuh.^oi Deliglited with tliis suggestion, the 
Emperor Wu-ti gave orders that exploring parties should be sent out from 
Sliuh and Kien-wei, by the fnur roads starting from there, with instruc- 
tions to find their way through the S.W. barbarians, and endeavour to 
discover India. ^02 These roads passed through the territories of Ma n g,^*'' 
Jen, Se and P'o of Kiung, and each advanced one or two thousand //: 
*'^*which is certainly a gross exaggeratitm of the Chinese record. At that 
time the Mang and Jen,^'^^ both unsettled tribes, were located near the 
N.W. borders of Szetchuen, in what is now Mutchou.^'^'^ The Chinese 
envoys who went North of thase routes were stopped by the T^i tribes in 
modern prefecture of Lung-ngan in N.N.W. Szetchuen, and by the T soh 
tribes, S.W. of Ya-tchou in the N.W. of the same modern province. 
The Southern routes [)assed through the S.e, within the modern prefecture 
of Sutchou in C. Szetchuen, ^^'^ and though the P' of Kiung, cor- 
responding to the territory of Yueh-hi or Yueh-sui, W. of the same pre- 
fecture. The exploring parties through the latter routes were stopped on 
the W. of the state of Ts en by the Ku en-mi ng and Sui tribes, 
in the modern prefectures of Tali and Likiang of W. and N. W. Yunnan. 
The K u e n mings were savages and they murdered the envoys. So 
that all the attempts had failed ^^^ 
I Some knowledge liowever had been gained. Several of the envoys had 
\ heard of a country about 1000 li to the West, named Tsen yuch, litt. 
(Beyond Tsen.^io where the inhabitants rode on elephants, and 
/ where the Shuh traders who carried a clandestine commerce with them, 
occasionally went.^^^ 

These statements which we take from the She Ki of Szema Tsien, 163- 
85 B.C., like all that we have reported on the subject, is interesting and 
important. We must understand that the travellingjnerchants of S hji h {^ 
had remained apart and refused to reveal the secret of their route S.W. ^ 
towards India, which they could not reach however without some private 
arrangement with the tribes who had stopped the Chinese ^nvoys ; and 
this explains how it happened that the exploring parties sent by the 
Chinese Emperor did not, in their expeditions, hear anything about the 
country of Shin-tnh which they had vaguely h.ard of before, as lying 
about 2000 // W."c)f the Kiung territory. The latter rumor which had 




62 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

come to the Chinese previously to their atten)pts referred to the trade 
route of Shuli to Patna tlirougli the S.E. corner of Tibet. The region 
Be yo n d-T s en of which they heard in their southern exploration, was 
northern Burma, as I have shown elsewhere,^^^ and specially the region 
of old Pagan named also T z i n d u e,^^^ but they did mistake it for India, 
because of the common habit of elephant driving which had been heard of 
by Tchang-Kien in Bactria as a peculiarity of India. Therefore they en- 
deavoured to pass through the state of Ts en, central Yunnan, which as 
we liave seen, had been conquered and established by a general from T s u 
^wo centuries previously.^ ^* 

On reaching the Kingdom of Tsen after having for four years vainly 
attempted to pass through the territory of the Kuen^mings who had 
closed the highways, the ( "hinese envoys were received by the King Tang 
Kiang who detained them on the gronud that they were searching out the 
roads, and prevented them to pass. " Is the Han a greater Kingdom 
than ours ? " said he haughtily to the astonished Chinaman. Other envoys 
sent with the same purpose to the ruler of Y e-1 a n g, a country extending 
along the South of Kien-wei had a similar reception. No passage was 
possible ; and to use the words of the Chinese annalist : " each of these 
princes considering himself sovereign in his own domain, was unconscious 
of the magnitude of the Han empire.^^^ Nothing therefore could be done 
for the time being. 

About twelve years afterwards, the Han Emperor, relieved of some of 
his harassments in the North, was euabled to act more vigorously in the 
South West and the South. 

In 1 1 1 B.C. he put an end to the state of Nauji^ueh which established 
in £09 by Tch'ao T'o, a refractory general of the Ts'in dynasty had ex- 
tended along the South from Fuhkien to Tungking, and he occupied a 
part of it, i.e. Kuangtnng and the eastward, whicli were divided for 
administrative purposes into nine regions. ^^^ Then the various popula- 
tions of whom we have quoted the names, and some others, all in the 
West and South-west, were admitted as vassals and Chinese ofificers were 
appointed as official overseers among them.^^^ The territories received 
special names in the Imperial dominion, and in the absence of Chinese 
residents among them, special officers were appointed, with residences 
generally on tlie borders to superintend their intercourse with the Empire. 
The treatment of the rulers of Ye-lang and of Tsen was, however, 
different. The former received the Chinese investiture of ruler in his own 
Kingdom without much resistance ; but the latter objected more strongly, 



CHINEfK CIVILIZATION. 63 

and he yielded only when he saw himself at tlie eve of being attache I. In 
109 B.C. he received the royal seal from the Han Emperor, and in the 
words of the Chinese annalist,^'^ "his people was still entrusted to 
his rule." 

By these arrangements which with a few alterations and interruptions 
lasted until the third century, access and egress were secured in that y^ 
direction for foreign trade with t];e Middlo Kingdom. But the state of 
Tsen (now read Tien), then feudal, presei'ved by its geographical position 
its command over the trade routes towards the South, while the S.W. 
route to India through the S.E. corner of Tibet was also available to its 
people. ^^^ 

The Tsen Kingdom for all that, deserves some attention. Its influence 
is still visible in the name of China itself which is derived from it, and 
thus far has won an everlasting fame. T'sen was the indigenous name of 
the region around the lakes of Yunnan fu and Tch'eng Kiang, of the 
town between them, and of the principal lake itself,^^^ a^d j^g meaning in 
the native languages was simply the* waters as the said lakes 
are the largest expanses of watei in the country. ^21 -pov the Han dynasty 
this feudal state was included into the great circumscription called Y li- 
te ho u Kiun whose administrative centre was at the ancient capital city 
of Shuh, the modern Tch'eng-tu. Its king was under the immediate pro- 
tectorate of the Han officer residing in the latter city. The Tsen 
Kingdom extended East and West of the lake region, but not at first as 
far in the West as the lake of Tali which was in the hands of the Kuen- 
mings, but in 109 b.c. this region itself was added to the domain of the 
king of Tsen in compensation of some territory on the east which was 
withdrawn from his authority. In the South its frontiers are not known, 
and we are not in position to state how far they advanced in the direction 
of the modern Shan states. The tradition quoted nupra from the Mahd 
Rajdweng of Burma refers most probably to an expedition made by the 
King of Tsen against Old Pagan on the Irrawaddy.'^^ And we may 
recognize perhaps a survival of the same name in that of the Shan state 
Tsen p h as called by the Laocians, not very far distant from tlie pre- 
sent Chinese frontier in a N.E. direction from Mandalay.^^s Referring 
to the Kingdom of Tsen in Yunnan, it was widely known under its 
name by its relations with foreign trade, and it was so for over five cen- 
turies. Established in iJSO B.C., it lasted through some changes of fortune. / 
in a state of submission to the Han dynasties or rebellion against them, 
until 224 a.d. Tchuko-li-ing, a general of the Minor Han dynasty'^*, 



g4 ORIGIN OP THE KARLY 

conquered the country and put an end to the old state of things, in 
redistributing the land to several native chiefs under the suzerainty of 
tlie Chinese.^-^ The T s e n country could be reached ^^e i^y t]ie trade — 
a ; from India: though the old route up the Brahmaputra to Sudiya, Roema 

crossing the Lu-tze and Lan-tsan Kiangs,^^'' and thence descending 

the Kin-Slia-Kiang ; 
h ; from Burma and the coast : by tlie Salwen river and perhaps the K.iu- 

lung unto Tchieng-hung=Teheli, and hence westward through Sze- 

mao (S. Yunnan). 
c ; from Tungking ; by Kattigara, the Partus Sinarum ol Ptolemy,^28 

and as a fact the nearest to and the real port of the Tsen country 

modern Kesho or Hanoi,^^^ upwards the Red River unto Man hao, 

and hence straight north by land. 

Let us remark that the foregoing sketch, simple as it is, gives us 
the solution of a long vexed question, that of the origin of the name 
of China which has been a puzzle for the inhabitants of the Middle 
kingdom as well as for many European investigators. All sorts of specu- 
lations have been made on the subject, ^^^ but it has been ascertained 
finally in recent years'"^ ^Mhat the first kn(m ledge and the spread of the 
name China, did begin only in the first century of our era^sz through the 
southern sea trade, and not through the North and South at the same 
time. The arrogant and not unimportant state, then named Tsen had 
long been in existence at the time, and for centuries occupied a com- 
manding position over the trade routes tf> the Middle Kingdom from 
Indo-China S.W. and S.E. Its name was spread far and wide under 
several cognate forms Thin, Sin, &c., and preserved for ever its predo- 
minance in the mouths of foreigners ^ 3 ^as ^n appellative for the greatest 
empire of tiie East.-'^-*'' 

The general survey we have just achieved in the present section of the 
historic evidence concerning the trade routes as means of communication 
from, through and beyond Szetchuen in antiquity, to the West, South 
West and Soutli may be briefly resumeil. We liave thus been able to 
find indications of the six following routes : 
>j 1) From Szetchuen, to the Jade country in the Khotan region, from 

1500 B.C. or earlier down to the ninth or eighth century b.c. 
>. 2) From Szetchuen to Patna in India, after that time and with inter- 
missions. 
3) Through Szetchuen from Shensi to Pegu, temporary, end of third 

century B.C. 



( 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 65 

4") Through Yunnan, from Szetchuen to India, third century u.c. and 
afterwards. 

5) Through Yunnan, from Szetchuen to Burma, tliird century B.C. and 
afterwards. 

6) Through Yunnan, from Szetcluien to Tongking, second century b.c. 
and afterwards. 
The words however are bigger tlian the things and no illusion must be 

entertiiined with reference to these routes. None can be understood as 
having ever been regularly followed by caravanes going to and fro, and 
therefore as the means of steady interchange and intercourse between 
their extremes and along their courses. A thorough passage from one 
and to tlie other of any of these routes cannot have taken place except 
in isolate cases unknown to history in the ancient times. Trade was done 
in a second or third hand fashion, the goods passing from one to another, 
and being either blackmailed or increased in price along the way. In 
these conditions which are vouchsafed by the personal interests of the -/'/I 
intermediaries, and the general laws of offer and demand in trade, it was 
only in the long run that something from one end of the route could be 
heard of at the other end, mangled and altered through the successive 
interpretei"r:. Tlie strictness of these observations applies of course more 
forcibly to the older than to the later times. 

Let us now enumerate which items of western civilization did reach, 
and those which may have reached the Middle Kingdom through these 
secondary and imperfect channels. Material objects and goods may 
travel by them, but notions and ideas could not do so without the greatest 
difficulty ; and besides the supply depended upon the state of knowledge 
in the countries which were reached by these routes. 

Notes 295) Szema Tsien, She Ki, Bk. 116, fol. 2 v.; Wylie's translation 
p. 5. — Cfr. also on this traffic, the Bk. 129 on trade in the She Ki, 
fol. 7. 

296) She Ki, Bk. 116, fol. 3v, ibid ; Wylie, p. 7. The traders of Shuh 
were carrying their commerce also with the east ; for instance in 135 
B.C. it was ascertained that they used to trade with the south east 
bv the Si-kiang or Canton River, the Tscmgko of the time, Cfr. ibid, 
fol. 3, and Wylie p. 5. 

897) The name has been met with" reference to the bamboo staves carried 
from there to India by the S.W.. as learned by Tchang K.ien in Bactria 
Cfr. supra. 

298) She Ki, Bk. 116, fol. 3; Li tai Ti Wang nien i^ias, Tsien Han, fol. 
6 V. — These arrangements lasted only a short time, as a few years after- 
wards, the Tsoh stopped the Chinese envovs. 

299) SheKi, Bk. 116, fol. 4 v. 



66 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

300) This must refer to a road througli the Tsili shih (cfr. note 276) 
and the South of the Kokonor. 

301) Tchang Kien's biography, in Pan Ku's Tslen Han Shu, Bk. 61. 
transl. A. Wvlie, p. 48, J.A.T. August, 1880. 

302) She Ki, Bk. 116. fol. 4 v.; Bk. 123, fol. 6 v. 

303 J It is the country misrtad Lonff in Matouanlin's Ethnographie 
11. p. 166. 

304) She Ki, T'a loan lieh tchuen, 123, fol. 6 v. 

305) In 111 B.C., until 67 b.c. the Han organised these two named 
tribes into a Iuu7i which received the name of Wen shan. The Jen 
moved eastwards later on, and in the sixth century they used to intercept 
tlie passages of the San Hia i.e. tlie three Yang-tze-Kiang gorges. 
Their descendants the Jen Kia Man are now at Shihtien and Yien-ho in 
the prefecture of Se-nan, in I^.E. Kueitehou. 

306) SheKi, Si Nan y tchuen, 116, fol. 1 v. 

307) Cfr. G. Playfair, ?7(e cities and towns of China, 'N. 1^,35, and the 
other names sub. 2-oc. 

308 ) These savage tribes were probably kindreds of the K u m o n g s 
Mishmi tribes of the present day, who are still preventing free com- 
munications between A^sam and China. The Kuen-ming seem to 
liave been tribes of the same stock as the Hiung-nu, who had moved 
from N.E. Tibet southwards about the third century B.C., along the 
•/ great exit of northern tribes to the South, which has been frequented 
in the same way from olden times to the present day. 

309) She Ki, Ta-ioanlieh tchuen, 123, fol. 7. 

310) Or still more literally "the Beyond of Tsen." 

311 ) She Ki, ibid. fol. 7. 

312) In two articles of The Acadeny, May 2, and Sept. 5. 1885 : Ttn- 
yfit not India, and India from China, which I confirm here. After 
the publication of my first article I saw that Baron von Richtofen, 
China, I, 427, had come to the same conclusion as myself. Prof. S. 
'S>e&\, Some remarks on the narrative of Fd-hien, J.R.A.S. XIX, 1887, 
p. 192 has suggested that this name might be Champa, but this is 
impossible because the Champa began only after 806 a.d. 

313) Cfr. sect, e) III of the present chapter, and note 291 supra. 

314) Cfr. sect, e) ** and note 274 of the present chapter. 
315) Szema Tsien, She Ki Bk. 116, f. 4 v. 

316) SheKi, Nan yueh tchuen,^k. 113, ff. 1-9. 

317) She Ki, Si nan y tchuen, Bk. 116, f, 4. 

318) She Ki. ibid. fol. 5 v. 

319) For instance in the Periplus, 63 and 65, transl. McCrindle, p. 146- 
148, we see that the T hi n a? obtained from the Sesatai, malahathrum 
which M-as exported to India ; conveyed down the Ganges to Gange 
near its mouth ; and also conveyed from the interior of India to 
Mouziris and Nelkunda, on the W. coast, for export. 

320) It was transcribed by the Chinese with the symbol of their writ- 
ing which is still used for the literary name of the Yimnan province, 
and in that acceptation is now read Tien. But the symbol with the 
reading Then has the meaning full, abundant and it is very pro- 
bable that the significant sound has attracted the meaningless name in 
the subsequent corruption of the language. The ICatig hi tze tien 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 67 

sub. voc, 85 + 11 ,a:ives some ancient ;iutliorities to sliow that the 
symbol was also read t c h e n, in the name of a district T c h e n-y a n g. 
On tlie other hand the Chinese ilialect which lias preserved the most 
archaic phonesis, with exceptions, the Sinn-Annamite, corresponding 
generally to 200 B.C., as shown in my historical scheme of the Chinese 
family of lungaages ^The laiu/. of Chin., sec. l'05) has still the reading 
t r h (I » for this symbol. It is composed of the determinative 85 water 
and the phonetic, 674 of Gallery's Si/stema plioneticum which has kept 
the reading tchen The same jjlionctic as shown by a rapid examina- 
tion in Dr. Chalmer's Concise Kang-hi's dictionary, enters into the com- 
position of 54 derivates as folhnv : 15 tchen, 17 tchen awdtien, and 22 
tien. Such are the reasons which show that the Chinese symbol now 
read Tien for Yunnan, must have been used at first for the same pur- 
pose with the reading t c he n ov t se ?i. The latter was probably the 
original sound which has diverged into tien and tchen. 'Cfr. following 
note 321 — M. G. Deveria, La Froiitiere Sino-Annamite, 1886, p. 119, 
gives X an^S h(i n as the xVnnamite name of T len. 

321) This native word for water was connected vvith the following 
which have the same meaning: Tchung Miao dj en, .S'ingpho nots in, 
Kakhyen \nt zin, Munnipuri i i^ h lug, &c., cfr. Beginninqs of icriting 
around Tibet, sec. 80. — The name T che n has survived largely in the 
geographical onomasticon of the province of Yunnan and its central 
part, and is variously transcrilied in 'Chinese ; such as Tchen-tiiung, 
Tchen-K'ang, Tchen-nan, Tchen-yuen, Tch'eng-Kiang, Tch'eng- 
Kung &c. 

322) Cfr. end of last section e. Ill and notes ^87-291. 

32o) li.\\Q Mung Siuen-wi, i.e. the state of Siuen-wi, the T h e i n-n i 
of the Burmese and the M u pa no:, of the Chinese. M. Ney Elias has 
given a brief sketch of the history of that state from the Zahu-Oke- 
Saung, a Burmese work. Cfr. his Introductory sketch of the history of 
the Shans, 1876, pp. 47-51. — And perhaps also the name of K i ang 
Tsen. Cfr. Holt S. Hallett, Report on the Railway Connexion of 
Burmah and Chna, p. 117. 

324) Also called Shuh Han dynasty (221-263 a.d.) as called from its 
capital at Tcheng-tu in Szetchuen. Its dominion was one of the three 
kingdoms into which the Empire of the Eastern Han dynasty was di- 
vided after its fall. 

325) Shuh tchi ; Tai ping yil Ian, 791, f. 5; cfr. also Ethnographie de 
Matouanlin, transl. D'Hervey de St. Denys, vol. II, pp. 153, 186. 

326) All the modern researches as to the possibility of trade routes to 
China, from India and Iiido-China have been carefully studied by M. 
M. Archibald R. Colqnlioun and Holt S. Hallett. Cfr. A.R.C., Across 
Chryse, vol. II, pp. 219-240 ; H.S.H. and A, E.G., Report on the 
Railway connsxion of Burmah and China, 1887. 

327) Kiu-lung is tlie name in the Shan states of the river which is called 
L a n-t s a n K i a n g in the North, and Mekong in the South. 

328) Plolem, Lib. I," cap. 11, § 1 ; Lib. VII, cap. 3, § 3 ; J. W. Mc 
Crindle, Ancient India as described by Ptolemy, Bombay, 1875, pp. 9 
and 245. 

329) The modern name Kesho is most likely a corruption of the ancient 
appellative of the country which the Chinese transcribed Ka o-t i cor- 



68 OlMOIN OF THE EARLV 

rupted into Kiao-tchi, with two symbols wliicli are still read in Sino- 
Annamite Kao-tje. The use of the sign Kiao has led t'j fabulous 
accounts as to a supposed antiquity of the people, 2000 e.g., which 
antiquity is not true. Cfr. my remarks The languages of China before 
tJie Chinese, sect. 89 and 90, and the addition ]). 152 in the french 
edition. — Dr. F. Hirth, in his paper Zur Geschidde des Ant/ken Orient 
handels, G. f. E. z. b., Berlin, 1889, which refers chiefly to the trade 
after tlie Christian era, has pointed out in the Tai-ping-Jinan-i/il-tch', 
K. 171, f. 6, a Chinese transcription Kao-teh which makes Kao-duk 
in the archaic sounds ofi the Sino-Annamite dialect, and therefore 
would be a nearer approach to the Katt'gara of the ancients. 
3:-)0) The most plausible suggestion was that which derived the name of 
China fr^jm that of a great state of N.W. China which from small be- 
ginnings about 909 B.C., reached the supreme power and liaving absorbed 
all the otiicr states of the Chinese agglomeration, became the Cliinese 
Empire in 221 b.c. The name was represented by a symbcil which is 
read T s i n since the fcurth century of our era in the N.W. As the 
same name was read I" a n previously to that late time, there is an end,- 
on purely philological grounds, to the suggestion, as I have shown in 
The Sinim of Isaiah, not the Chinese, III, in B. O.R. I, })[). 4fi-47. 
The ground being untenable for historical reasons as well (cfr. following 
note), another suggestinn was made that the name may have originated 
with the frequent \\<q' oi jen for m a n in Chinese ; but this is another 
philological impossibility as the word is a recent corru])tion of an ancient 
ran or Ian (The land of Sinim not China, III, uncorrected, ibid. pp. 
186-188), and is opened to the same geographical objectidus as the 
previous one. The latest suggestion was made by Baron vun Richtofen; 
it is only objectionable on philological ground, but the objection is- 
altogether fatal to the proposal. The learnod geographer thought, 
that tlie commercial relations with the Middle Kintidom having taken 
place through Tung- King, tlie prototype of the name of China which 
was revealed by thrg^Uouimerce in the first century of our era ought to 
be found there, and he su2:2:oste'.l the name of Jib-nan as the antecedent 
wanted. The mime indicated by tliis modern Cliinese reading was really 
that of the southern most province of Annam as divided after the 
Cliinese conquest in 111 B.C., and corresponds roughly to the modern 
province of Nghe-An. But at that time it was read Nit nam, and it is 
still read Nhiitnam in Sino-Annamite. This simple fact puts an end for 
ever to the suggestion. 
331 The identification of Kesho-Hanoi with the old Kattigara has 
been established in a masterly way by Baron v. Richtofen and Col. H. 
Yule. cfr. B. v. R.'s papers in the Trans, of tl.e Berlin. Geogr. Soc. 
for 1876, and China, vol. I, 1877, pp. 504-510; Col. H. Y., ^otes on 
the oldest Records of the Sea-route to China from Western Asia 1882, 
})p. 9-11 (Extr. Pr. R.G.S.), and A Glossarji of Anglo-Indian 
collo'juial ivords and phrases, sid). voc. 
332) llie name of 71i:n i appears for the first time in the Periplus Mans 
Erythroii, 65, 66, dating about 80-9 of our era. Cfr. J. W. McCrindle, 
The Commerce and Naviqation of tlie Erythraean Sea, Bombay 1879, 
pp. 147-149. 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 69 



/) A Resume of the Chapter. ^^ 

§1- 

The present section, as a conclusion to our long survey of the un- 
satisfactory, though various and successive, routes which permitted the 
introduction of western notions of civilisation in ancient China, subsequent 
to the great importations by the Baks in their migration to the East, 
and have proved to be altogether ill-fitted if not impossible for anything 
strictly Assyro-Babylonian, must necessarily be little else than a rapid 
sketch and a short resume. 

The history of China in ancient times may be divided into six periods 
which we shall refer to for the convenience and clearness of our researches 
as follows : 

1st period. From the settlement of the civilised Bak tribes arrived from 
the N". W. circa 2250 e.g. to the Hia dynasty circa 2000 B.C. 
Though interspersed with native populations, the Chinese do not extend 
beyond the basin of the Yellow River, nor do they reach the sea. 
2nd period. From circa 2000 B.C. During the Hia and Shang-Yn 
dynasties to circa 1100 b.c.': Friendship with the native populations, 
and in some moments united strength, secure to the Chinese the pre- 
dominance they are entitled to by their superior civilisation. A slight 
knowledge is gained of the whole country as far South as the Yangtze 
Kiang. The settlements are strengthened, some advance is made east- 
wards and the sea is reached about 1777 b.k;. But there is no great 
extension of power through intercinal difficulties, and the seat of the 
central government is shifted from place to place eleven times during the 
Hia_and eight times during the Shang-yn dynasties. During the latter 
dynasty, the various principalities of the dominion, withdrew no less 
than six times from their allegiance to the Royal authority, ^'^ 
3rd period. From circa 1100 b.c. to 770 b.c. ; the W. Tchou dynasty. 
An energetic and powerful race from the N.W. conquers the country 



70 OEIGIN OF THE EARLY 

and ensures respect everywhere. Its dominion is firmly established 
West and East from Sheni to Tchihli and W. Shantung, and south- 
wards at mid-way between the Hwang-ho and the Yang-tze Kiang. 

4th period. From 770 to 481 B.C. ; the E. Tchou dynasty so called be- 
cause in 770 they were compelled by native tribes to remove their 
capital westwards. The various states forming tlie Chinese dominion 
are growing gradually independent and the central power is declining. 
The border states grow in importance. 

5th period. From 481 to 221 e.g. The contending states. The declining 
iiuthority of the E. Tchou is a mere shadow, and is put to an end by 
the W. state of Than — Ts'in. The period is one of struggle for the 
supremacy between the various states ; they are successively conquered 
by the state of Than which succeeds in 223 B.C. to overthrow its 
last and most powerful competitor, the half-Sinised and southern state 
of Ts'u. 

6th period. From 221 b.c. to 25 a.d. Establishment of the Chinese 
Empire by Ts'in She Hwang-ti over two- thirds of the modern China 
proper. This short lived dynasty disappears in 209 B.C. and the 
Former Han dynasty begins in 206 b.c. The Han succeed after a 
century of struggle to uphold the integrity of the Empire and rule 
gloriously; tliey are followed in 25 a.d, by the After Han dynasty 
which ruled until 220 a.d. 

Let us resume our enquiry in the progress of the ancient Chinese and 
their outside relations, with reference to these six periods. 

Note 335) Under Yung-ki, 1649 or 1487 b.c; Ho-tan-kia, 1534or 1381; 
Yang-kia, 1408-1319 ; Siao-sin, 1373 or 1287; Tan-kia, 1258 or 1204; 
Ti yh. 1191 or 1111 b.c. The two dates are those of the chronology 
now usual in China, and of the Annals of the Bamboo Books. Under 
Yang-kia, tlie princes had not come to court for nine generations. 
Cfr. Szema Tsien, She Ki, K. Ill, £f. 6, 7, 7 r, 8v and 9. 

§2. 
The object of chapters III, IV and V of the present summary has been 

to resume the various items of civilisation during the first period in 

sciences, arts, writing, literature, institutions, religion, historical legends 

and traditions, forming with a few exceptions, the important culture of 

Babylonian and Elamite Origin, and which they had acquired in S.W. 

Asia, through their relations with the country of Elam. This civilisation, 

nearly complete as it was, could not have reached China otherwise than it 

did, i.e. through the immigration of civilised tribes and in a wholesale 

manner, as no successive imports, like those which took place afterwards, 



CHiNESB Civilization. 71 

of shreds of western knowledge, could have produced such an homogeneous 
•ensemble of obvious borrowings^^^ from the most important civilisation of 
S.W. Asia. Tlie demonstration, which is conclusive, refers chieily to the 
first of tlie six periods we have just enumerated. 

The first part of the present chapter in its five divisions and scA^en 
subdivisions (VI, n, b, c, d, i, ii, iii, e, i, ii, iii, iv), has been occupied 
with a survey of the various cliannels through whicli notions of civilisation 
from foreign countries may have reached the Middle Kingdom in times 
subsequent to the establishment of the civilised Bale tribes in the Flowery 
Land. We have been compelled by the difficulties of the case to go 
more deeply into historical details tlian in the former j)arts, because we 
had no longer any special papers previously published to refer to on the 
subject. Though eliciting not a few historical facts little known and of 
interest, and having to call attention to circumstances hitherto neglected 
or not yet extracted from their Chinese limbos, we have not been able to 
discover any regular channel or constant intercourse for the ingress of 
western knowledge in the principal state of the Far-East. The results 
of our enquiry so far have been most important for the purpose we are pur- 
suing, since none of the various channels we have studied have proved to 
have permitted the introduction of anything better than mangled bits and 
bungled notions of civilisationh from Central Asia (Khorasmia), India, 
Egypt, Oman, &c. Without entering fully into the details of acquisitions 
and progresses made by the civilisation of the Middle Kingdom during 
its third and successive periods, and therefore without benefiting of all 
that they will teach us, we have found histori'^al evidences of six occasional 
and unsatisfactory inlets for foreign knowledge to have been brought in. 

Note 336) In my fourfold list of these, I have omitted references to the 
artistic influence of Babylon and Elam on the early Cliinese art. A 
few words only can be said here on the subject. On the most ancient 
bronze sacrificial vases still preserved, this influence is clear. The 
chief figure is the head of a horned monster, made as repulsive as 
possible and subsequently distorted in an ornamental manner so as to 
be past recognition. It was called t'ao-t'iet, or the " glutton," and it 
is now explained as intended to be admonitory against inordinate 
feasting at the annual sacrifices. Cfr. P. P. Thorns. Ancient vases of 
the Shang dynastij, London, 1851, p. 7. The t'-ao-t'iet occurs on 23 
out of the 42 vases reproduced in tliis work from the Foh-ku-tu, and on 
9 out of the 20 vases reproduced in Pauthier's China, pi. 38-13 from 
the Si-tsing-ku-kien. As a fact the original object of the hideous 
figure was to frigliten away a devourmg demon. In the Tchun-tsiu of 
Lu shi (250 b.c.) it is said that on the ancient vases the t'ao-fiet had 
a head and no body, to intimate that in devouring persons, before even 
they can be swallowed, destruction comes upon it. Cfr. K'ang-hi tze 



72 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

tien, 184 — 9, f. 85. The design of the monster was traditionally pre- 
served from that frequentlj represented in Cliaida>a to scare away the 

"* demon of the south-west wind which was greatly apprehended there, 
because, coming from the deserts of Arabia, its burning breath dried up- 
and devoured everything ; the head was tliat of a skeleton but half 
decayed, and adorned with horns, and the eye^ still remaining. The 
general idea was '' to represent the demons under such hideous forms 
that it was sufficient for tiiem lo be shown their own image, to cause 
them to flee away alarmed." Cfr. Francois Lenormant, Chakhean 

,y Magic, p[). 50, 52, The Chaldsean name of this demon is unknown as 
yet, so we cannot carry the comparison further thau^ie resemblance of 
design and object. Cfr. for the figure: Lenormant, Hist. Anc. de V 
Orient, t. v, p. 213; Perrot-Ciiipiez, Histoire de VArt, t. II, p. 496. 
Other creatures on a very small scale are also represented on ancient 
Chinese vases, somewhat like fancy birds which became gradually 
entirely distorted. Their peculiarity is that they go generally by pairs 
fronting one another, a feature originally peculiar to the Assyro- 
Babylonian art, according to Von Sybel and to Perrot-Chipiez, O.C. II, 
pp. 747—748. Another of the chief ornaments on the Chinese vases 
is that of buds, leaf-shaped, in rows, which appear on Chaldaian 
ornaments (cfr. Layard, Monuments I, pi, 6, 9, Perrot-chipiez, 0. C. II, 
pp. 70-!, 771-2) of bronze dishes and embroideries. It is a conventional 
design of the cone-fruit which is reprasened on the monuments in the 
hands of genii and others, and which has certainly a symbolical meaning. 
F. Lenormant, OrU/ines de Vhistoire, 1, 84, has pointed out a pre- 
scription of Ea to Marduk (Cun. Iiiscr. W. A. IV. IG, 2 and 29, 1) 
where the cedar-fruit is specially mentioned, cfr. T. de L , The Tree of 
life and the Calendar plant ofBahj/lonia and China, n. 5, and B. d' 0. 
Ji. II, 150. On the other hand Dr. E, Bonavia, I'he cunefriiit of the 
Assyrian monumejits, B. & 0. R. II, 138, 170, and 173, has shown 
reason to believe that in some cases at least, the represented cone-fruit 
was a citron. And quite recently, Dr. E. B. Tylor, The fertiUsation of 
the date-palm in ancient Assyria, Academy 8 June 89, p. 396 has 
suggested the cone-fruit to have been the inflorescence of the male 
date-palm, a suggestion which seems to me to be confirmed in some 
other cases, sucli as on the alabaster bas-relief of the Louvre, fig- 
gured in Perrot-Chipiez, 0. C, It, p. 64. A classification must con- 
sequently be made of the monuments. Returning to the early Cei- 
nese art, the chief ornamtnt is a sort of scroll, grecqiie or meandre, 
which is employed everywhere in all sorts of varieties, and seems con- 
genial to the taste of the Chinese. They call it yun-lei-ioen, ie., 
cloud-thunder ornament, and explain it as derived from an ancient 
form of the symb(jl for cloud, as it appears duplicated in the com- 
position of some ancient forms of the character for 'thunder.' Cfr. 
Min-Tsi-kili, Lu shu t'litig, II. 9, and Tung-Wei-fu, Tchuen-tze-wei, 
s. v. Though we maj^ refuse to accept this explanation, there is no 
reason to discountenance the originality of this scroll in China, inas- 
much as it is so very simple a pattern that it has occurred in sev- 
eral instances independently elsewhere. Curiously enough, it is al- 
most unknown in Assyro-Babylonian Art, but it occurred frequently 
in ancient Egypt, Judea, Hissarlik, Greece, and in a curved form ou 
the early bronzes of Denmark. — A peculiar form of hair-dress, repre- 
sented by a small black stone object in the British Museum, Nimroud 




CHINESE CIViLIZATlON. 73 

Gallery, H, which has attracted the attention of Perrot, 0. C, II, 595n, 
wliici) is exactly siraihir to that of important men in ancient China. 
Cf. with Pauthier's Chine, pi. 22, 36 and 51. 

§3. 

Daring the Second period there was no other channel than that of the 
eastern traffic of nephrite-jade originally from the Khotan region, thi^. 
region which was to be Aryanised^ ' from Khqrasmia and Bactria tlirough 
the passes of the Badakshan country, ^ 38 about the end of that period, 
was yet uncivilised and could not be a source of knowledge to borrow 
from ; moreover, its neplirite jade did not apparently reach the Middle 
kingdom otherwise than after passing through several hands. And should 
the trade of that precious gem have been carried without intermediary 
the information and notions available to be carried to the East were only 
those of Irano-Indian source, as the Indo-Aryans were then in occupation 
of the lands on the West side of the Badakshan passes and the Tsung- 
ling range. The Assyro-Babylonians had not reached them, and the 
influence of their civilisation on the latter has been nil or nearly so; 
even in India in later historical times, Babylonian influence has been 
at a minimum ; an interesting peculiarity which however is easily ex- 
plained bythe geographical conditions of the respective countries. ^^* Any 
Assyro-Babylonian noti'^n, to make its way eastward, had to pass through 
the Irano-Indians' mouths and minds, who were too highly spirited a 
race to have acted the part of middlemen and faithful transmitters of 
foreign ideas without stamping them anew. 

The foreign relations of the Middle Kingdom, unimportant politically 
as the latter was at that time, were limited to native and border bar- 
barian tribes, ^^*^ with only two apparent exceptions, during the reign of 
Tai MuU of the Shang dynasty about B.C. 1466, and under the reign of 
Wu-ting, about b.c, 1269. In the tenth year of his reign, Tai Mou of 
Shang is said to have been visited by envoys of distant states, seventy- 
six in number according to one authority, and only sixteen according to 
another. No information whatever has been handed down, by tradition 
or documents concerning these foreign comers. They may have been 
trading£.\rtie3 magnified as is usually the case, into ambassadors from 
some remote countries or simply representatives of foreign tribes beyond 
the pale of Chinese influence. The same remarks apply to the six foreign 
envoys who came to the court of "Wuj^ting. Now one must not forget 
that the Chinese dominion, then within narrow limits, was surrounded ou 
til sides by a great many communities of indigenous and independent 
tribes ; in the N.W. on the borders of Tibet, the Kiang tribes, some of 
whom submitted afterwards, numbered more than 120 ; and within 



74 OIUGIN OF THE EAKLV 

modem China proper, the number of non-Chinese tribes was over 400. 
On the oUier hand the records of tlie Hia and Shang dynasties are often 
' , and not mncb more than mere lists of rulers and inter-reigns ; 
they were preserved indifferently in the states of Ki and Sung which had 
charge of them, and we know from the words of Confucius himself, that 
^n his time they were already in a very dilapidated condition. ^'^^ It is not 
at all impossible that at the above dates some notions from the West 
should have reached the Chinese through seme trading parties, by the Jade 
traffic route ; periiaps some calenddric and astronomical knowledge, inas 
much as Wu-hien prime-minister to Tai Mou, the king who received 
foreign envoys, is reputed to be the author of the first catalogue of stars. ^'^^ 
This, however, is a mere hypothesis which no side lights support in the 
present state of our knowledge. No progress of importance, nor any new 
acquisition of civilisation seems to have been made by the Chinese at 
that time besides this catalogue, should it be so considered. ^^^ With the 
sole inlet we have montioned, the reverse would be surprising, witli re- 
ference to knowledge of foreign ori-in, and as regards the internal pro- 
gress, the shaky C(mdition of governmental affairs was not fav(jrable to 
promote any advance. Astronomical studies were pursued, and the 
ancestral worship was extended to that of departed great men at the ex- 
pense of the state. 343 'Yhe proper names of the living ruler were also 
tabooed for the time being ;34* the two latter features, which tradition has 
preserved in use, are rather suggestive of a lower standard of mind among 
the rulers at the time of their introduction than was formerly the case. 

337) The region of Khotan has been looked upon by several scholars as 
one of the oldest centres of metallujt;gic trade, (cfr. D'Eckstein, De 
quelques Jeyen(hs Brahmaniques qui se rapfbrtent au herceau de fe-yiece 
humaijie, in Journ. Asiat., Oct. Dec. 1855. — Fr. Lenormant, Efsai de 
commentaire des fragments cosmngoniques de Berose, p. 315 ; Origines 
de Chht'tire, vol. II, pp. 151-154). But the evidence collected in sup- 
port of this view is very slight, and in my opinion cannot bear such a 
mighty C(mstruction. Legends of afVr time were fostered there because 
of its geogrfiphical position quite central. Abel Remnsat has derived 
his Ili.Htoire de la rille de Khotan tiree des Annales de la Chine, Paris, 
1820, from Cliinese sources, and J. Klaproth, has followed a Turkish 
geographer in his H/stoire de la rille de Khotan, in Mem. Rel. a I'Asie, 
Vol. II. pp. 281-301 ; and these two works are the sole authorities on 
the subject referred to by D'Eckstein and Lenormant. The fertile 
imagination of D'Eckstein has gone too fr in his inferences from the 
simple fact that Kuvera, the god of wealth of Brahmanic pantheon, 
corresponding to the Avestic Kb s hathra-Vai rya (on which cfr. C. 
de Harlez, Aresta, II edit. p. xciii) and also called a Vis Havana 
or Vaisrava, moreover Ruler of the North, and described as a magni- 
ficent deity residing in the splendid city Al aka (cfr. Edw. Moor, fhe 
Hindu Pantheon, N. Ed., Madras, 18G4, pp. 180, 183, 192), ot]ier\>ise 



CHINKSE CIVILIZATION. 75 

Khotan — Kustana. He was supposed to be a local deity of pre- 
Aryan origin, and was worshipped by tlie first king spoken of, in the 
Legends, whose date, according to Buddhist sources, was 234 years 
after the Buddha's Nirvana, or about 2:^S n.c. The same sources either 
collected from Iliuen Tsang's report or from Tibetan documents, make 
this king contemporary and victorious of a son of Agoka who had been 
sent there. (Cfr. Si-f/u-kl, Buddhist Records of the Western World, 
transl. S. Beal, vol." II, pp. 309 sq. ; WoJdville liockiiill. The 
early historjj of Li'- yul (^Khoten) in his Life of the Buddha, 
from Tibetan sources, pp. 230 sq). It is usua^ with Buddhist sources 
to reckon the beginning of anything with or about the time of the 
Buddha, but in the present occasion as it begins with a failure of a son 
of Acoka, the mformation may be trusted to a certain extent, since it 
does not record a success in the extension of Buddhism. And it is no 
proof as to tlie Aryanisation of tlie country which seems to liave takeu 
place about tlie Xllth century. — Baron F. von Richtofen {China 1877, 
I, p. 4S«) previously to our disclosures, has put forth the view that 
the Kiiotan region was the original seat of the civilised ancestors of 
tlie Chinese, but this temporary hypothesis has fallen short of what we 
have shown to have been the case. The civilisation whicli tliese an- 
cestors were a-^quainted with was the Babylonian-Elamite which never 
reached in the time of its greatest exteirsion beyond the Zagros and 
Paropamisus ranges. 

338) The direct route from Tokharestan to the Tarym basin, passing 
through Badakshan, was an important trade route from early times. 
Cfr. E. Bretschneider, Medctvval Researches, vol II, p. 65. 

339 t Cfr. infra Cb. VII. 

340) Herewith the necessary resume of these fi^reign relations. In 
these seven following statements except when otherwise stated 
I follow the words and dates of the Tchuh shu Li nien (a work of 400 
B.C.) — 'I) In his 8th year. i.e. 1845 b.c, Tchu the Vlth ruler of the 
Hia dynasty, went on a punitive expedition towards the eastern sea, 
as far as S,iii-show (central Shantung) and caught a fox with nine tails. > 
As an instance of the magnifying and embellishing system of late 
Chinese compilers, here is tlie same event as reported in the l^'ang 
Kien Rang Muh drawn by the too celebiated Tchu-hi (..d. 1130- i 200), 
transl. De Mailla, vol. I, p. 152 : " Pendant tout son regne, Ti Chou 
jouit d'une tranquillite si grande que les peuples voisins se faisaient 
gloire de se soumettre a ses lois. Les insulaires menie de la mer 
orientale, qui n'avaieiit pas paru depuis le grand Yu, vinrent lui offrir 
leurs hommages et se reconnaitre dependants de 1' Empire." As manyv 
lies as words. — ,11). In his -.'1st year i.e. K^JjQliiC., the same ruler 
conferred Chinese dignities on the chiefs o/six tribes of Y barbarians/ 
of the East.— (III). Fah the XA^th of Hia, in his 1st year, i.e. 1596> 
B.C. ; various tribes of the sanivj barbarians came and made their sub- 
mission. — (IV ). 
1581: B.C. ; some 

T 'ang, the first of the Shang dynasty, i.e. 1575 B.C., at his accession 
is visited by all the feudal princes, or chiefs of families and natit^e 
tr'bi'S, to the number of 1800 with eight interpreters. At the beginn- 
ing of the Tchou dynasty, which was much more powerful, their 
numbei" was only 800, so that we may premise that the former figure 
has been magnified with the tenfold intlation so frequently met in 
Chinese literature, and therefore must be reduced to 18C. The T'ung 



Kwei, the XVIIth and last of Hia, 6th year, i.e.. 
Jung barbarian tribes of West China sul)mit.--(y). 



76 ORIGIN OF THE EARLV CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 

Kien Kang Muh, says : " sa reputation de siigesse s'etendit si loin que 
les quarante royaumes que 1' on conaissait alors avaient pour lui la 
plus grande veneration."' — (,VI). In the 19th year of the same king, 
i.e., 1557 B.C., the Ti-Kiang people (in Kansuh) made their submission. 
(VII). In the 10th year of Tai Mou, the IXth of Sliang, i.e. 1466 B.C., 
76 states from distant regions {Yuen fang) sent messengers with in- 
terpreters to his court, in admiration of his virtue. The statement is 
no part of the text, and is the object of a gloss. Other sources are at 
variance with it. The Kang Kien // tchi luh, a compilation of a.d. 1711 
gives their number as 67 (Medhurst's Ancient China, p. 35-i. The 
T'ung Kien Kang Muh mentions 76 feudal princes of the empire and 
besides envoys of sixteen foreign countries (De Mailla, I, p. 192). — 
(VIII). In the 28th year of the same king, (i.e. 1-150 b.c.) |some 
West- Jung tribes (W. Shensi - made their submission, and he sent 
Wang Mong as his envoy with presents to these hordes. In his 61st 
year, i.e. 1411 B.C., niii^yX i-6. eastern_tribes made their submission. — 
(IX) under Wu-ting, the XXII of Shang-yn, in his 6th year, envoys 
from six states, using interpreters came to court; since that time 
feathers of wild biids were much used on court dresses. The first of 
these two statements only I find in De Mailla, t. I, p. 221, while the 
two are made in the Kang Kien y tchi luh, I.e. p. 358, and none in the 
Tchuh shu kl nicn. — G. Pauthier, Chine, pp. 67-8, and M, Paleologue, 
Art Chinois, p. 100, in his trail, have attributed by far too much im- 
portance to tliis fact. Pauthier was led to do so by a misapprehension. 
The mythological and unhistorical character of the legend reported by 
Greek writers concerning a conquest of central Asia by JSesostris, had 
not yet been proved in his time (1839), and the French scholar thought 
that this arrival of foreigners in China was a result of the supposed 
Egyptian conquest. 

341) 'Lun->/u, II, 23, cfr. below ch. VII, §1. 

342) On Wu hien, cfr. Shu King, V, xvi, 7 ; She Ki, III, f. 6.— And 
Mayer's Chinese R.M., No. ^Q\..-Tcheou-li, R. XXIV, fol. 19 gloss; 
transl. Biot, vol. II, p. 77. 

343) In the Li Ki, XX, 9 we hear of Kaosin-Tikuh (who was chief of the 
Baks before Yao) as able to define all " the zodiacal stars and exhibit 
their times to the people." The Tchuh shu Ki nien. Part 1, id, states 
that Kao-Yang Tchuen-hiuli, predecessor of Ti-kuh, "in his 13th 
year invented calendaric calculations and delineations of the heavenly 
bodies. 



Chap. VI. /) A Resume. §4. 

During the third period i.e. the Tchou dynasty {^circa 1100-770 b.c), 
the situation is quite different. An important focus oi astronomical and 
astrological lore had been established by a branch of the Aryan races in 
Khorasmia about 1304 e.g., and it is only what could be expected to find 
that the Tchou a people of Kirghize origin^^^,who had settled for centuries -^ 
on the N'.W. borders of China, were acquainted with some shreds of 
knowledge from that source. The success of the Tchou may have been 
an incitement to the Jade traffic ; some more notions from the same 
quarters, in a more or less dilapidated condition, have reached the Middle 
Kingdom at a subsequent date, through the route of Khotan then Arya- 
nised — and the Badakshan passes. For instance, Muh Wang^*^ (circ. 
1000 B.C.) who made an expedition westwards^*^, was presented with 
nephrite-jade (of Khotan), and asbestos-cloth^*^ (of Badakshan) ; the 
possibilities of intercourse, however, were partially stopped by the rising 
in the IXth century, of the then semi-Chinese and uncivilised state of 
Than, — later Ts'in on the N.W. of China, that same state which we 
bad so often occasion to mention in the preceding sections of the present 
chapter. The Jade-traffic was carried on nevertheless, with increased 
difficulties and through Tibet, by the merchants of Shuh or Sze-tchuen, 
but not for a long time. Their attention was soon attracted towards the 
south-west by a greater facility in the communications and trade. Although 
no regular intercourse was established with the South, some parties of 
traders from Yunnan West and South, enticed no doubt by the reports of 



78 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

intermediary tribes about the power and wealth of the rising dynasty, 
came to the Chinese court with a monkey of India^^o and probably some 
goods of the same country, which fact seems to show that intercourse be- 
tween the Malabar coast and Burmah had already begun. These trading 
parties were the real openers of the communications which we shall have 
to mention during the following period. 

The sea trade through the Arabian sea and the Bay of Bengal, which 
later on, was extended to the Chinese seas, and imported a few western 
notions to the native states of the East in Shantung, through which they 
passed to the Chinese, seems to have begun about that period.'^^ The 
first enactments concerning currency were issued about 1032 b.c. by a 
prime minister named T'ai Kung of Ts'i, an eastern barbarian less 
fettered to tradition than a n;itive Chinaman, while some rules mention- 
ing the ring-weight money were established about 947 B.C. f^^ it seems 
difificult not to connect this remarkable progress with the influence of 
foreign trade w'hich began about this time. 

Under the guidance of the founders of the T c h o u dynasty, a thorough 
organisation and systematization took place. Some advance and certain 
changes were made under the combined influence of newly-imported no- 
tions and internal progress, difficult to distinguish as to their respective 
importance. 3^3 '];i^g -^^^q of the sexagenary cycle and that of the Jupiter 
cycle of twelve, both of ancient date,^^* was improved ; so were those of 
the clepsydra, the stile of which was divided into 100 ki for a day, and 
of the sun-dial, the gnomon of which was pierced at the top. The latter 
permitted circa 1100 b.c, some observations to be made at Loh-yang 
with such accuracy that they have been verified by Laplace and Biot in 
tlie present century, ^ss and found exact, without any possibility of being 
the result of any retrospective calculations. The knowledge of the 28 
3iu or stellar mansions and their use for prognostication, was also an ac- 
quisition made at the beginning of the period, ^56 grafted upon former 
notionsof astronomy ; their close similarity with the 27 or 28 Nakshatras 
of India, and^the 28 manazils of the Arabs is not genealogical in one di- 
rection or the other, but simply one of common descent from an older 
system, 357 now known to have been systematized in Khorasmia,^*^ for 
astrological purposes, and made to begin with the Pleiades, features which 
have survived long in Cliina. The beginning of the day was fixed at 
midnight, while under the Shang dynasty it was at noon, and under the 
first dynasty at sunrise, as in ChaldseaSss. The beginning of the year wa 
also altered; the Baks had brought with them the Chaldaiau habit of 



CHINESE CIVILIZATION. 79 

commencing the year at the vernal equinox; under the Shang, the hist 
montli, and under the Tchou, the second month of winter were made the 
first month ^'''^ : but the irregular svstem of intercalarv months seem to 
have somehow brought them into confusion. In arts they became also 
acquainted with the process of"tempering iron^'^^. 

In religion we see them adding Earth to Heaven in the denomination 
of the Supreme deity^''^^ .ind among other customs we remark the sacrifice 
of a dog which is run over by the king in his chariot when he goes out of 
the kingdom^^^. Both features may be due to the Indo- Aryan influence 
which had undoubtedly reached the mass of the Tchou people, notwith- 
standing tlie alliance and sinicisation of their leaders reported in their 
legendary history. 

We have also to mention the development of the use of proper names 
a practice due apparently to a similar influence. The notion of the five 
elements, which appears at the beginning of the dj^nasty was, however, an 
old idea wliidi must be traced back to a different source^^^ 

344) Here are two facts from the Tchuh chit Ki nien, in support of my 
statement concerning the extension of ancestral worship to departed great 

men : Yuh-ting tlie Vth of vShan*;, in his 8th year i. e. B.C. 
1521, appointed sacrifices to P a o-h a ng, temple name of Y-yn chief 
minister to the founder of tlie dynasty. A notice of this eminent 
man is given by Mayers, Chinese R. JI., No. 233. Later on, Wu-ting, 
the XXIInd ruler of Shang, in his 12th year, i.e. 1262 b.c. offered 
a sacrifice of thanksgiving to Shang-Kiah ]V^ei, a former minister of 
Sieh, tlie Xth king of Shang. — Under the Tchou dynasty the royal 
temple of ancestors was seven - slirined (Shu King IV vi, 10 ;— 
Tchung yuny, sec. 4), and there Ts no intimation in any writings of high 
antiquity tliat the practice was different under the Hia and Shang 
dynasties. But in the second_century, J. C. Wen Yuen-shung put forth 
the view that under the Shaiig dynasty, the shrines were only_five; cfr. J. 
Legge, Chinese Classic><, vol. Ill, p. 218 notes. 

345) The custom of tabooing proper names has arisen among not a few com- 
munities in a low stage uf mental development from the difficulty|for the 
undeveloped mind to s^-parate, the subjective meaning from the objective 
value of a name, or in other words, the thing from its term. Appear- 
ing among the Chinese at that time, we take it as an influence of the 
pre-Cliinese populati.ju yet in occupation of the greater part of the coun- 
try. Its name is p'-hwny, which in the archaic phonetism of the Sino- 
Annamite dialect is still pronouncedii-it, and bears a resemblance to 
tapi of Tahiti, a similar custom. Cfr. the notes 2, 3, and 4 § 8 of my 
-pAiter on The Djurtchen of Mandchuria, J. R, A. S. 1889, vol. XXI. 
Prof. B. K. Douglas in liis useful Chinese Mmnual, just published, has 
a specialsection, pp. 37-— 376 (m the tabu-ed characters of the present 
dynasty of China, and a few others. 

346) We must remark about that name which was afterwards explained 
by mythological legends )Girard de Rialle, Memoire sicr VAsie Centrale 



\I 



80 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

p. 88) that it appears in the history of the Tchou; the grundfiither and 
really historical ancestor of Wu Wang was ki-lik (for Ki-rik, Kirk, &c., 
which cfr. to Kirgh-iz.). 

347) We have already mentioned this expedition ; above ch. VI, sect, b., 
and notes 1G7-171. In the Kwoh-yu, Part I, and in the Annals of 
the after-Han dynasty, it is reported that Muh Wang made a puni- 
tive expedition in the West against the Junq Tek barbarians and 
smashed their five chieftains. He seized four white deers and four white 
wolves, and afterwards pursued the Teks to the great source or Tai- 
yuen, perhaps in that case the sources of the Huang-ho. Cfr. Tal ping 

w »/?i Ian, R. 792, fol, 2 v. — E. Reclus, Asie Onentale, p. 146, records 
that the Mongols sacrifice every year seven whitg^spotle&s animals at 
the sources of the Huang-ho. ' 

3-1.8) P. Gaubil was of opinion that some new notions of astronomy 
from the West had reached China at the time of king Muh. Cfr, 
his Histoire de V Astronomie Chinese, p. 381. 

349) As recorded by Lieh-tze, 400 n.c. Cfr. Tai ping yil Ian, K. 820, 
f. 8, also supra VI, b and notes 168-1G9. On the asbestos of Badak- 
shan, cfr. Aboulfeda, Geographle, p, 474. Badakshan is the moun- 
tainous region including the upper part of the valley of the Oxus. on 
the N. of the Hindu-kush. .Cfr. note supra, and the following 
chapter. 

350) Cfr. supra, ch. VI, d, I. 

351) This sea-trade was carried on from remote times along the shores 
of the Erythrcean sea, (i.e. Red sea, Arabian sea, and Persian gulf) by 
the Kushitos, a Caucasiiin^ 4;ace (une race blanche, says G. Maspers, 
Histoire a'icienne, ed. iV, p. 105) brown skinned, (ib/d. p. 196) 
vvhicli in course of time lost of their unity by intermingling with popu- 
lations negroid or lower in type were they settled. They have left 
their na^ in many places as land marks of their settlements between 
Ethiopia and Gedrosia, but this name has been subseqttently altered 
by folketymology in the various localities. (Cfr. my paj)er 27(e Kushitos, 
who were the//? §6 and for a comi)letion of these land marks, J. S. 
Stuart Glennie, The traditions of the Archaan white races, §5.) Tliey 
had reached S. Egypt and repelled the negroes to the South at the 
time of the Vlth dynasty, but their seats were in South^__^rabia where 

^ they had several emporia, which multiplied in course of time were the 
points of (departure and arrival of their trading ships, with Egypt, 
Babylonia India, &c. On the history of this trade and its extension 
eastwards, cfr. a special section in ch. VII. 

352) Cfr. supra, note 172. 

353) Dr. Stern, Gvttinger GeJehrte Anzeigen 1840, p. 2026, in his 
\ \ criticism of Ideler's had })ointed out already eight astronomical analogies 

' in the knowledge possessed in Chaldea and vhina. '" ^ 

354) The supposition of the Rev. Dr. J. Clialmers that those notions 
were introduced into India from China, has no basis, since India did 
possess them only in the Christian era, as we shall have the occasion 
to see further on. 

355) On the sun-dial, gnomon and clepsydra, cfr. a special section in 
the next chapter. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 81 

356) Cfr. G. Schlegel, Uranographte Chinotse,Y>.^^l. 

857) Long discussions have taken place on the subject, of. Ed. Biot. : 
Journal des savants, 1837-40 ; Etudes su7- V astrotiomie Inditnne et 
chinoise, 1862, pp. 249-888. — Prof. A. Weber : Die ved'schen Nuc/i- 
richten ran den Naxatra (Mondstationen), I, II, Berlin, 1800-62. — 
Prof. W. Whitney : On the views of Biot and Weber respecting the 
relations of the Hindu and Chinese systems of Asterims, pp. 1-94 of J. 
Am. Oriental Society, 1866, vol. VIII, and pp. 382-398. 

358) Cfr. Albiruni, Chronology of the ancient nations, pp.342 and 227. 

359) Already pointed out by Dr. Stern, l.c, — It was so in the calendar 
fixed by Tchwen-hiuh, second successor of Hwang-ti. but we do not 
know how it was under the last named and foimer ruler. 

360) Under the Ts'in it was the 1st month of winter. For the Chinese 
changes, cfr. J. Legge, Chinese classics, t. II, p. 162, t. Ill, p}). 41, 
154, 215. 

361) Under Muh-wang at the time of his expedition beyond the western 
borders. It was not an Indo-Iranian notion at that time ; cfr. Wilh. 
Geiger, ia civilisation des Aryas, p. 635, m Museon, 1884, vol. Ill, 
pp. 430-438, 627-652. 

362) They said Tien Tl, Heaven and Earth. Cfr. Shu-king, V, I, 1, 3. 
Cfr. the ludo- Aryan Dydvdprithivyau, from dyu the sky, and 
prithiva the broad earth, when involved together. And also the 
hymn \o the Earth in the Rig- Veda, I, 22, 15. Cfr. Max Mailer, 
India, tvhat can at teach lis ? p. 138. And also A. Pictet, Les Aryas 
primitifs, t. I, pp. 666-7. 

363) Le Tche'ou-li, XXXVII, J ; t. II, pp. 364-5. The sacrifice seems , 
to have originated to propitiate the two monstrou §, dogs. guardians of ^ 
the road from which there is no return, a belief, we hear of among 
the early Indo- Aryans. Cfr. A. Barth, Religions of India, pp. 2-'-3. 
On a mythological notion of the same kind in Assyro Babylonia, M. 
W. St. Chad Boscawen kindly communicates to me the following note: 

" Tlie double headed dog often represented on the boundary stones was 
the emblem of the god Tutu or Merodach as the god of the morning 
and evening dawns, "the begetter and restorer of the gods, like the 
Indian Yama or dog-headed god of death and the dawn." 

364) In the counsels of the great Yu forming the third chapter of the 
Shu-king, water, fire, metal, wood, earth andgrain or the six 
stores, are specially enumerated together, §§. 7, 8, as requiring regu- 
lations for the welfare of government and people. In the Ts'o tchuen, 
Wen Kung, year VII, 10, where the statement is quoted, they are 
also called the six fu or stores (of nature). It has been stated by 
the Rev. Dr. J. Chalmers that this six fold list must have come from 
the Avesta {Origin of the Chinese, p. 26) where according to his state- 
ment, the six Amesha ^pentas rule over a somewhat similar arrange- 
ment. And pursuing his remarks the same writer, dropping one of 
the six, finds a closer agreement with the five elements of the Chinese. 
These hasty comparisons and derivations cannot, however, stand cri- 
ticism, notwithstanding the Rev. Dr. J, Edkins, The five elements in 
Persia, in China Review, 1888, vol. XVII, pp, 49 sq., who has up- 
held the same views, and some more such as an identification of the 
six Amesha (^pentas with the six tsung of Shun whom we have found 



82 OHIGIN OF THE EARLY 

simply, as proved by their names to have been a survival of the six 
great gods of Susiana. The two writers of China, above quoted, falling 
into the fault usual to Chinese authors, have neglected tiie strict con- 
ditions of accuracy and clironology required in historical research. 
Now the notion of the five elements, Wii heng as usually translated 
from the Chinese by Europeans, is mentioned in the Shu king, III, ii, 
3 under the reign of K'i the successor and a son ot the great Yli. 
Later on at tlie accession of the T ch ou dynasty, AVu Wang the first 
ruler was presented by Ki-tze, a follower of the former dynasty, with 
the Hung fan or great Plan, a combination of numerical categories in 
which were embodied the doctrine of tlie times of the great Yu. {^Shu- 
hing, V. iv). Tlie five heng enumerated therein are the following : 
water, fire, wood, m~et. a 1, and earth. Therefore the theory of 
the six/tt and of the five heng is reputed, apparently with some reason, 
to be as old as -'000 b.c, in Cliina, a date much earlier than anything 
Avestic and Persian and which would reversedly suggest a derivation 
from China to Persia, should any close identity exist ; such, however, 
is not the case. HerodQtu^'-Jj^ 131, says that the only deities whose 
worship liad come down to the Persians from ancient times were : — 
t the vault of heaven to which they offered sacrifices without images, 
/ temples or altars on the loftiest mountains ; the sun and moon, the 
] earth, fire, water, and the winds. At the time of the Greek 
1 historian the Persians were still a new nation, and lie iduly remarks how 
eager they were to embrace foreign notions of civilisation. Modern re- 
search confirms these comments ; the Persians have added successively 
to their native Aryan notions, ideas and beliefs, others from the Magi, 
from Khorasmia, from Elam, from Assyro-Babylonia, from Asia-Minor 
and even from Egypt, Such, for instance, in the latter case is the 
remarkalile threefojd head-dress of Cyrjts on the.jiiiimiments, which cf. 
in G. Rawlinson's Herodotus, yo\. I, p. 256; VeYvot-C\\\\)Wz, Histoire de 
V Art, vol. I, p. 7i3 ; M. Marcel Dieulafoy, V art antcque de la Perse, 
188-4, vol. I, has pointed out the Grjeco-Lycian influence ruling the 
Persian architecture which originated after the overthrow of Croesus 
about 554 and the conquests of Cyrus ; although the workmen were 
Persian, the architects were originary from Asia-Minor. Media had 
been organised towards 700 b.c. and transformed into the Persian 
kingdom in the Vlth century. Zoroaatrism had begun long before at 
an unknown date and was flourishing among the Hyrcanians and Cas- 
pians S.E. and S. of the Caspian j;ea^ with its chief seat at Ragha, and 
not""aT'Bactra as stated in a tradition of the middle ages. It triumphed 
in Persia only after the accession of the Sassanides, i.e. 228 a.d. Cfr. 
C.deHarlez, Le calendrier Person et le pays originaire du Zoroastrisme, 
1881 ; and introduction a V etude de V Avesta et de la religion Maz- 
deenne, 1881,) The Magi, the inheritors of Zoroaster formed a part of 
the Persian nation, but their doctrines and the numerical categories re- 
ferred to above had not yet at the time of the compilation of tlie Avesta 
i.e. probably between 700 and 200 B.C. reached their final develop- 
ment, (Cf. Fr. Spiegel, Eranische alterthumskunde, vol. Ill, p, 787; 
also Ph,Keiper, /y^s noms propres Perso-Avestiques, Museon, 1885, 
vol, IV, pp. 211-229, 338-358, C, de Harlez, Observation snr V age de 
I'A vesta, ibid, pp. 230-1 : and Origines du Zoroastrisme, Paris, 1879; 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 83 

J, Darmesteter, Haurvatdt et Ameretat ; Paris, 1877 ; Ormazd et 
Ahriman : leur origines et lev histoire, Paris, 1877, The six] xVmesba 
Cpentas are creations of the Mazdeism, and at first were only personi- 
fications of moral notions, such as is yet the case with four of them in 
the Gilthas, (cf. C. de Harlez, hitrochtction, p. 90), which forms the 
oldest part of the Avesta, and whose special date of composition later 
by several centuries than that of the Rigveda, is fixed at the utmost by 
some between 1500-1200-900 b.c. (cf. L. H, Mills, The Zend Avesta. 
part III, 1887, Introd. p. 37.) Even in later times, when the Amesha 
Cpentas and the Yacatas were attributed a more precise control on 
parts of nature, no regular categories of the five elements, as in China, 
is apparent. Cfr. C. de Harlez, Avesta, Introd, pp. 88-111, where their 
attributes are described at length. Therefore there is no relationship 
between them and the six and five Chinese categories, and the simi- 
larity claimed by Dr. J. Chalmers and the Rev. J. Edkins rests only 
on misconceptions and misinformation. It is more likely a fact that 
the six fu and five heng were part of the Elamo-Babylonian categories 
and notions received by the early civilisers of China. We must wait 
for further light on the subject, when more inscriptions of ancient 
Susiana are discovered and deciphered. Such ideas may have been an 
amalgamation of Chaldean and Elamite views, and be the same that 
afterwards made their influence felt in Mazdeism. We may expect also 
some further information from the decipherment of the cuneiform in- 
scriptions relating to numerical categories. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. • 85 



Chap. VII. — Items of Babylonian, Persian, Indian, Egyptian 
AND Greek Civilisations entered into Ancient China from 770 
B.C. TO A.D. 220. 

I. 

97, In the previous chapter^^s ^g i^ave successively examined the var- 
ious channels through which influences of the civilised Western world may 
have entered and in reality did enter, into Ancient China, viz. : section a) 
Ancient dynasties of Western origin; b") the Jade eastern traffic; c) An- 
cient trade route of the eastern sea-trade; d) Ancient trade routes inland. 
South and South-west, and e) the trade of Shuh (Sze-tchuen). 

The second part of the same chapter (called section /) was occupied 
with a rapid survey of the general advance in foreign knowledge which was 
made in China, during the three first periods of its history, namely, 1) from 
c. 2272, Arrival of the Bak families, who were most probably a blue-eyed 
ruddy faced and not black haired race,^^^ from the West, to the Hia dyn- 
asty; 2) from the time of the great Yli to the end of the Shang-Yn dyn- 
asty, and 3) from the beginning of the Tchou dynasty to their removal to 
Loh-yang in 770 b.c. 

98. There are several additions which further researches'^' enable me to 
make. The Bak families when they established their settlements in N.W. 
China, knew gold, silver, copper, and tin (or antimony), whose 
symbols are all traceable to their antecedents in the mother writing of 
Western Asia.^^^ They had great difficulty in finding silver in their 
new country, and the discovery of the o b stina te m et al (silver= Fn- 
made of ken, obstinate and Qcin) metal) under the Hia and Yn dyn- 
asties has remained historical. They owe their knowledge of i r o n at the ' 
time of the great Yli, to the native populations of North Szetchuen, who 
were well acquainted with it, and they called it accordingly the Barbar-l 'i 
ian metal, (tiet, iron, written at first Y, barbarian, and hin, metal), as 
well as by other names, tiet and lou, borrowed from the native dialects. 

In the middle of the eighteenth century, the Chinese became acquainted 



86 CHINESE CIVILISATION. 

with the art of Bronze. In 1741 b.c. a branah of the Kun-wua coming- 
from the Kokonor, settled at Hiu (Honan, N.), introducing with them 
the western art of bronze (invented in Asia^Minor about 2_500^B.c.), which 
had been carried eastwards through the tin stations of Moshed (in Khoras- 
san), of Kiu-tse (in Eastern Turkestan), and Kokonor. The initial pro- 
portions of tin to copper, which increased in the east, and diminished ia 
the west, was 15 per cent,^'*^ 

99. The introduction of the western art of tempering iron, which I 
thought to have taken place at the time of the expedition of Muhwang to 
the west, in the third period {supra VI, /. 4.), did not happen then.^'^ 
A due consideration given to the texts on the matter has convinced me- 
that they refer to the Assyrian art of inlaying metal, which was then 
brought to the knowledge of the Chinese, ^''^ while the other art was not 
learned by them before several centuries had elapsed. ^'3 

100. As we have not already done so, we must here notice the great- 
literary and political event which had happened towards the end of the 
third period. It was due to the energy and foresight of Siuen the King 
of TcHou and of his able minister Sze-tcKou in 820 B.C., during a tempo- 
rary revival of the power of his throne.^^'* The ancient Ku-wen writing^ 
introduced from the West by the Bak families, had diverged to some extent^ 
in the course of centuries, from its original forms and modes of composi- 
tion; the language had varied, the area of the Chinese dominion was larger 
than in former times, aboriginal tribes had been absorbed and assimilated^ 
regional variants of the spoken language had arisen, and in consequence, 
the phonetic spelling of ancient times suggesting a spoken term, uni- or 
poly-syllabic in one monogram only, simple or complex, which was largely 
resorted to in the written language, had ceased to be adequate with the 
requirements. Therefore Siuen Wang and Sze-tch'ou felt the necessity of 
obviating possible misunderstandings of the written commands and instruc- 
tions from the Crown in any part of the Chinese dominion, and they made 
a bold attempt to do so. Although successful only in a small limit at the 
time, from want of continuity of power and recognized authority in their 
hands and those of their successors, the principle they laid down remained, 
and, followed in later centuries by powerful rulers,"^ has given to China- 
her present wonderful writing which is understood everywhere, even in non- 
Chinese countries, notwithstanding the variety of the spoken languages 
and has thus greatly contributed to the unity and greatness of the Chinese 
Empire. The principle followed by Siuen Wang and Sze-tch'ou in their 
recast of a large number of the written characters, was to make them more 



ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 8T 

ideographic, even more pictorial, and thus to make them more significant 
to the eyes than before, at the expense of the phonetic suggestion, if ne- 
■cessary. The original number of characters, beyond the wanted additions 
required by the progress of knowledge, had increased from various sources: 
1^) variants resulting from the gradual neglect of the primary rules of 
spelling and composition, and the actual ignorance and carelessness of the 
scribes; 2°) local variants of the standard forms, entered into the vocabu- 
lary with an acquired shade of meaning; S^) pictorial equivalents, of diffi- 
cult or little known standard characters, actually created among the less 
cultivated part of the Chinese dominion. These various causes of diver- 
gencies continued to act after the reform of 820 B.C., and the new standard 
forms were not regularly obeyed, because of the weakness of the central 
authority; but as the principle of ideographism, by its suitableness to the 
environment, had become paramount, the written documents could hence- 
forth be understood everywhere without great difficulty ,3^^ It is only in 
the sixth period, that we shall have to refer again to the transformation of 
the written characters. 

101. The present chapter is practically the continuation of the second 
part of the preceding, since we shall continue now our survey of the evo- 
lution of Chinese civilisation, began therein for the three first periods. But 
the importance of the events which occurred after 770 B.C. downwards, the 
greater supply of documentary evidence, and the everlasting influence 
which these events have exercised on the subsequent history and present 
condition of the country, make it necessary to deal with them in a new 
chapter. 



Notes 

365) The numbers of the paragraphs which have been omitted in printing 
the previous parts of the present work may be easily ascertained by re- 
ferring to the final table of contents. 

.366) A black-haired girl amongst them was looked upon as an extraor- 
dmary being at the time of Shun; the ruddy faces of the men and the 
whiteness of the women's complexions are severally praised in the Shi 
King; the indigo plant was denominated by them the eye-like plant. Cf. 
my paper on The Black heads of Babylonia and Ayicient China: B. & 
0. R. vol. v., pp. 233-246. 

-■367) Contained in my Monograph on The Metallurgy of the Ancient Chi- 
nese, which, prepared as a chapter of my Introduction to the Catalogue 
of Chinese Coins in the British Museum, was one of the chapters left 
aside for want of funds (unprovided for in the estimates). 

J68) In Gold and Tin, cf. B. & 0. R. vol. V. pp. 38-39, in T. de L., 
From Ancient Chaldcca and Elam to early China, § 16.--Silver was 
white metal as in the west; Copper, tung is derived from the 



88 ORIGIN OF THK EARLY 

original symbol for crucible as in the west. The Rev. C.J. Ball has 
found independently the derivation of the symbol for gold. Cf. his 
Ideogram common to Accadian and Chinese, P.S.B.A., Dee. 1890. 

369) This date hke that of 2282, for the settlement of the Bak sings un- 
der the leadership of Yu nai hwang-ti (Hu Nakhunte) on the banks of 
the Loh river in Shensi, in the 50th year of his rule, is calculated from 
the statements of the Annals of the Bamboo Books; the date of 2332 
for the first year of Hwang-ti, verified by Hwang-p'u-mi (supra, Ch. III. 
§12); and that of ]904 B.C., lately verified by astronomy (G. Schlegel, 
r. Kuhnert, Die Schu-King Finsterniss. Amsterdam, 1889), together 
permit a scheme of chronology much more satisfactory than the common 
scheme built in the Xlth century on false astronomical data, or the 
chronology calculated from the Bamboo Books which has been frequent" 
ly followed in the previous chapters. I haye given a comparative table 
of the three schemes, so far as the history of money is concerned in my 
Numismatic Chronology of Ancient China, forming the Ch. I. of my In- 
troduction, referred to. note 367. 

370) Tlie use of special ores of copper led to the discovery of Bronze. 
For the proofs and details, cf. my Monograph On the Western discov- 
ery of bronze and its introduction in Ancient China. — The various pro- 
portions of tin to copper according to the object required are stated in 
the Tchou-li, Kiv. 41 (ed. Biot, t. II. pp. 491-492). The Analvses 
of Chinese bronzes hitherto published concern bronze objects of com- 
paratively recent make. Assyrian bronzes contained from 15 to 10 per 
cent tin. 

371) It occurred only in the sixth century, as shown below, 

372) For all details and proofs, cf. my paper on The Metalliu-gy of the 
Ancient Chinese. 

373) A few of the items included in the lists forming the fourth chapter, 
which progress of research has proved to belong to importations of the 
fourth period will be indicated below. 

374) I have called again, after several ancient writers, the attention of 
scholars to that great event, one of the most remarkable which could be 
quoted in the general history of writing, in several of my publications: 
Early history of the Chinese Civilization, 1880, p. 15, sq.; On the his- 
tory of the Archaic Chinese writing and texts, 1882 p. ti; Begi^inings 
of writing around Thibet, part I,, §55; Le non-monosyllahisme du Chi- 
nois Antique, I'ecart entre les langues ecrite et parlee d'aujoud'hui, et 
I'histoire de la langue ecrite, 1889, p. 14; and elsewhere. 

375) In 227 and 212 B.C., in 165 and 579 a.d. 

376) The own written characters of Sze-tch'ou are generally called ta-tchuen, 
Great tchuen, and those framed according to his pnnciples tchuen, 
in contra-distinction to the same style reduced and simplified in227 B.C., 
which was called siao tchuen, i.e., Small tchuen. The \fOvdi tchuen 
means literally curved, and the usual term seal character is only 
an appropriate rendering. 

II. Fourth Period, 770-481 b.c. 
a) The Ages of Wonder-ism. 
102. The IVth period begins in 770 B.C. when the capital of the 



x 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 89 

TcHOU dynasty was transferred eastwards to Loli-yh (Loh-yang, Honan), *^ 
after the death of the previous king through tho hands of the Kiuen- 
jung,377 -nestern barbarians, side ancestors of the Burmo-Nagas tribes of 
the present day, and it lasts until 481 B.C., when began the internecine • ' 
■wars of the various states of the Chinese dominion contending for the 
Imperial supremacy. It is one of the most important in the history of 
Chinese civilisation. Importation by the east and by the south-west of 
numerous foreign ideas and notions which have had an everlasting influ- 
ence on the evolution of the Chinese views, moral and religious, and the 
beginnings of "Wonder-ism, Taoism Confucianism and Tao-sze-ism, took 
place during that period. 

The various states and especially the border ones in contact with the 
outside word, less fettered than previously to accept anything new but 
through the authoritative channel of their suzerain the King of Tchou, 
were henceforth open to initiative of their own as well as to innovations 
introduced by foreigners. 

1 03. The eastern sea-trade which we have noticed in the first part 
of the present chapter, section c, as one of the channels of introduction 
of foreign items of civilisation has exercised a most remarkable influence^'^. 
It was carried by sea traders from the Indian Ocean, who, opposed un- 
successfully after 680 b.c.^''^ by the small Chinese state of Kili (in S.E. 
Shantung) founded around the present gulf of Kiao-tchou, (on the South 
side of the peninsula), Lang-ga which they called after the old Ceylonese 
Lanla^^^, S. of the gulf, and Tsih-mieh, afterwards Tsih-moh, their mart 
andmint-place on the North. They reckoned among them sea-farers from the 
Arabian sea^si^ but their chiefs were Hindus. One of them named A'wL 
lu, i.e. Gotra, as shown by the story of a cow connected with his visit, 
was the object of a grand and unusual reception at the Court of the prince 
of Lu (S. Shantung) in 631 b. 0.^82, They were friendly with the Chin- 
ese states and carried on with them extensive relations ; their introduc- 
tion of coinage about 675 was soon imitated by the Prince Hwan of 
Ts'i, and his able minister Kwan-y-wu. And in later times they estab- 
lished monetary unions for the issue with joint names of coins between 
themselves and inland Chinese cities^ss^ They recognized the suzerainty 
of the Ts'i state in 550 B.C. 

104. Astrology and sorcery '84 from Chaldjean source, (about 6G5 B.C.) -z 
tinged with Indian views, Elamo-Persian notions, mythological imagery 
of Egypt, India, and Babylon, ^ss ideas of transmutation and alchemy, ^^s 
amongst other innovations ; and besides coinage and measures^^' in 



.i"" 



K'< 



90 CHINESE CIVILISATrON. 

675 B.C. several material progresses sucli as the western art of tempering 
iron^ss^ known in 540 B.C., or perhaps before, importation of foreign pro- 
ducts such as the Quince-fruit indigenous from Media, circa 660 b.c^^^ 
were successively introduced, (more or less inaccurate and altered as the 
case may be) by them into China during that period. The charactet of 
their knowledge was not refined, and belonged properly to the wonder- 
mongering spirit that could be expected from sea-traders of that age. 

105. It is through their channel that the following data came into the 
Chinese literature. 

— A hybrid list of names of the twelve Babylonian months^'" ; 
— A list of ten names which may be that of the old Semitic months^^^ ; 
— A Babylonian list of twelve Zodiacal names^^^ ; 

These three items were chiefly used for astrological purposes and they 
do seem to have been adopted to that service by the sea traders in ques- 
tion previously to their introduction into China. 

All these lists communicated orally to the Chinese scribes were trans- 
literated by them as approximately as they could. They differ in their 
outwards aspect from the data of early date imported by the Bak families 
about 2282 B.C., such as the cycles of 10 and 12, and many others noticed 
in our chapter IV, a) sciences and art, which are thus disencumbered of 
several of the suspicious items which have crept among them. 

106. We must also ascribe to the same influence ; 

— One peculiar superstition, such as the idea of exposing in the sun rays 
I to the mercy of heaven, in time of draught, an emaciated person dying 
of thirst and hunger^"; known in the state of Lu in'^*, 639 B.C. ; 
— The annual practice of " giving a wife in Marriage to the river god 
Ho-peh " in throwing in the river a well-favoured Maiden, which well es- 
tablished at I'eA^35 Qires. Tchang-teh fu, N. Honan) in the state of Wei, 
was suppressed after 4-24 b.c, by a new governor named Si-men 
rao396 . 

— ^The fire-worship which was estabhshed sometime before 564 and 541 in 
the state of Sung^^^ (Honan, E.) where it was connected with astrology's^; 
— The remarkable dualist worship which was established in Tcheng 
(Honan, E.) in^aa, 524 B.C., to Hwei-luh, god of light and fire, and 
Hiuen-ming, god of darkness and water*'^'', then known in Chinese my- 
thology for the first time^''^, 

107. Several men of importance are mentioned in history as having 
promoted the astrological doctrines introduced and propagated by the ac- 
tive traders of the Lang-ya colony. Four of them are conspicuous ; 



ORIGIN OF TUK EARLY 91 

namely : Sze yoh, whom we see giving astrological explanations to the 
duke of TsiN (Shansi S.) in 564 b.c.402 ; Tze Tch'ang who died in 521 
B.C., a younger son of duke Tch'eng (reigned 584-571 b.c.) of the state 
of TcHENG (Honan C.) where he occupied a high position and became 
finally chief Minister for 26 years before his death'*'^'^ : Tze Shen, in Sung 
(Honan E.) in 545 and 522 B.c.^O'*. And Tch'ang Hwang in Tchou 
(Honan W., Shensi S.E.) who flourished in 550-492 b,c. ; Szema-Tsien 
says of him that he was acquainted with all matters concerning the gods 
and spirits, and that the sayings about the wonderful amongst the people 
of TcHou date from his teaching3^°^. 

108. These four men may be looked upon as the real founders of the 
Tao-sze-ism*°6, and were the immedate predecessors of Lieh-tze and 
Tchwang-tze whom we shall have to refer to in our survey of the next 
period. We must now examine where was the fountain head of the sin- 
gularly mixed influence introduced by these foreigners of Lang-ya, influ-r 
ence which continued for several centuries and displayed later on a curious 
and instructive transformation. But during the sixth century, while this 
activity was going on in Shantung and the states in the vicinity, another 
influence of a higher standard had reached the Middle Kingdom by the 
South-west route, and introduced several innovations ; the most striking 
was a certain amount of Hindu thoughts which have deeply tinged the 
great philosophical work of the period, i.e. the Tao teh king of Lao-tze 
(604-520 B.C.). We shall have to enquire on the important subject of 
the beginning of Taoism in a subsequent section, and afterwards on that 
of Confucianism. 

Notes 

377) On the Jungs, cf, J. H. Plath, die fremden harbarischen stamme 
in Alien China, Miinchen, 1874, pp. 477-495 ; and T. de L., The 
Languages of China before the Chinese, par. 28, 150, 172. 

878) The Rev. J. Edkins was, I think, the first to point out the introduc- 
tion of Babylonian astrology and imagery in China about that time 
and the great movement of thought which ensued, through tlie ancient 
navigation in the Indian Ocean, and I am indebted to him for several 
suggestions. But he was mistaken in several of his premises which he 
had not worked out ; he knew nothing of the opening of the Shan- 
tung sea-trade about 680 b.c, nor of the Hindu colonies in Pegu about 
500 B.C. He assumed without proof that a Babylonian sea trade to 
Indo-China had existed from remote date, which assumption is against 
scientific evidence. On the other hand he wants to begin astroloo-y 
in China about 806 B.C., without any serious proof, which is too early 
by far, and he thinks that it could have reached the Chinese in the 
South of China, where they were not, inland through Indo-China 



92 ORIGIN or THE EARLY 

which is not the case, as shown forcibly in my present work, 1 am 
not sure that the following list of Dr. Edkins papers and communica- 
tions on the matter is complete : Babylonian Origin of Chinese astron- 
omy and astrology, China Review, 1885, XIV, 90-95 ; Babylonian 
Astronomy, ibid., 104 ; Astrology in Ancient China, ibid. 345-52 ; The 
introduction of Astrology in China, ibid. 18S6, XV, 126-28 ; Chinese 
Mythology and Art, The Academy, July 12, 1884 ; Ancient navigation 
in the Indian Ocean, J.R.A.S. 1886, XVIII, 1-27 ; When did Baby- 
Ionian Astrology enter China, Pr. S.B.A., Dec. 7, 1886, 32-39; The 
relations of the Persian and Chinese Calendars : China Review, 1 887, 
XVI, 95-9S ; also 2%e Th king as a book of divination, J.R.A.S. 
1884, XVI, 360 sq. 

379) Cf. Tso tchuen, 2, 1 : 4.— Hob Tchih, Tsih mohhien tchi, 1763, 
Kiv. I, f. 3. 

330) Vide suprd par. 44 ; and note 25 of my paper : How in 219 
B.C. Buddhism entered China. B.&O.R. V, 105. 

381) Tsih-moh, seems to have been called after the emporia of Safar, 
Sophar, Zabar, of the coasts in the Arabian sea. Suppara of the W. 
Coast of India, Zabaj of N.W. Jara, Zabai of Indo-China, all names 
surviving or locally adaptated from a common original. Moreover we 
find a proof of that in their Babylonian astrology, 

382) He was chief of the Kicd foreigners, near Lang-ya, on the south 
side. Cf. Tso-tchuen, 5, xxix, 1 and 5. 

383) Cf . my introduction to the Catalogue of Chinese coins in the Brit- 
ish Museum, eh. I and VII. 

384) This sorcery appearedl think for the first time in 662 B.C. (cf. Tso 
tchuen, 3, XXXII, 2). Astrology was not known in China, in 710, 
669, nor even in 661 b.c, all dates where it should have been re- 
sorted to, if known then Cf. Tso tchuen, under these years. Besides 
divining by the tortoise shell or the millfoil, the chief means of fore- 
casting events were onomancy and palmistry. Astrology appears rather 
abruptly in 655 B.C. when Yen the state diviner of TsiN quotes as 
childish ditties {fung yao) an astrological answer concerning a project 
of his Prince, given by some adept of the new doctrines. The native 
exegetes in taking the expression t'uvg yao as meaning " the children 
have a sang which says" are certainly at fault here, as children could 
not have made such a thing. Astrology took gradually its place as a 
mode of forecasting events. An instance occurs in 664 B.C. in the same 
state of TsiN (Shansi) ; it was followed by subsequent statements in 
545, 540, etc., which show that the belief had become well established in 
the above state and m those of Tcheng (Honan C.) Sung (Honan 
E.), and in others. The twelve principal states of the Chinese domin- 
ion were, each, placed under the superintendance of one of twelve 
aodiacal signs whose names appear then for the first time as we shall 
see below (note 392). Amongst these states are those of Tchkmg 
which begin in 806 B.C., and of Tsi'U (Shensi) which began in 770 
B.C., while the name of the state of Yueh which did not appear be- 
fore 537 B.C. was added either to that of Yen under Tcheh-muh, or to 
that of Wu, under Sing Id. As the latter state appears for the first 
times in history in 584 b.c. amongst the states the astrological ar- 
rangement must have been made between 584 and 564 b.c. — At the 
time of the Han dynasty some gaps have occured and the attribution 



CHINESE CIVILISATrON. 93 

of several names forgotten ; they were restored by Tcheng-hiuen (a.d. 
127-200) in his commentary of the Tchou-lt, xxvi. 20 ; and also in 
the T'ien-yuen lih li of Siu-fah (a.d, 1682), with slight differences. 
Dr. J. Edkins, Ancient Navigation in the Indian Ocean, J.A.R.S. 
1881, XVIII, 12, has quoted only the latter's list, and holds the view 
that the astrological attribution of the states may have taken place in 
806 B.C. because the list begins by Tchenq, but this is no proof since 
we have not the original list, and the later writers have began it as 
they used to do in enumerating the 28 siuh; cf. also a rejoinder made 
on other grounds in the China Review. 

385) As the mythological imagery became prominent only during the 
next period we shall postpone till then our enquiry on the question. 

386) These notions came into effect at the end of the next period; they 
were too crude and vague before. 

387) The coins were cast on the double basis of the light Babylonian 
Mina as unit of weight, and of the Babylonian empan of 27 mm. as 
unit of length. Of. the chapter VI on Weights and Measures, in the 
Introduction of my Catalogue of Chinese coins in the British Museum. 

388) This art was known in Shantung about 540 b.c, but not yet in 
the states more south ; cf. my monograph On Ancient Chinese Metal- 
lurgy. 

389) An ode of the Shi-king I, 5, X.) composed about 660 b.c. in Wei 
(Tchihli S.W.) praises the Muh Kua or quince fruit (not the papaya 
now so called in South China and introduced from America). The 
quince tree, indigenous in Media, is highly valued all over the east 
for its cardinal virtues, and its fruits are to this day the object of an 
important traffic from the Persian gulf to the Bay of Bengal. It was 
then introduced in the China by the sea trade of Lang-ya. Cf. for 
the details and proofs my monograph on The Quince-fruit from Media 
to China, 660 b.c. 

390) The names of the cycle of twelve, which were part of the knowledge 
of the Bale sings, were those of the Babylonian Zodiac, on which cf. 
my letter in the Academy, Oct. 11, 1890, The Zodiac and cycles of 
Babylonia and their Chlness derivations ; while the full names which 
appear in the Erh-ya and She ki are those of the twelve Babylonian 
months. The entry of ch. IV, section a, and note 45, must be altered 
and completed as above. See next note. 

391) This is the list which appears, with the preceding, in the Erh-ya, 
and in the She ki, but with greater divergences which however are not 
too broad not to be explained as transliterations from oraldictation. Mr. 
E. Chavannes, in his interesting paper on Le Cahndrier des Yn 
(Journal Asiatique, Nov.-Dec.1890) about the terms of the duodenary 
series, simple formula of good Omen, remarks p, 479, that the oldest 
instance of their use occurs in the Kwoh-yu, in the ninth year of Kou 
tsien of Yueh (496-465 b.c.) i.e. 488 b.c. (not 479 as he states errone- 
ously.) — The duodenary list has been applied in a clumsy way to the 
duodenary cycle of Jupiter, and Dr. J. Chalmers in his paper On the 
Astronomy of the Ancient CAmese (append, in J. Legge, Chinese Classics, 
vol. III. 1865) has remarked that the term sheht'i-koh, ancient Shepti 
and Koh, which Shepti is said by Szema-Tsien to be Jupiter, in Sanskrit 
Vrishaspati, may be an approximate transcription of the Indian name. 
On the other hand, I have pointed above, ch. IV, a, note 45, the ob- 



UNIVER3ITY 



94 OEIGIN OF THE EARLY 

vious derivation of these names from a hybrid list of those of the Baby- 
lonian months, and the clear identity of shepti with shebat. Since 
they have been introduced into China in the sixth century only, and as 
astrological terms through the Indianised sea-traders of Lang-ya, the 
two statements are easiy reconcileable. The outwards resemblance of 
shebat with vrlshaspati may have been one of the reasons which induced 
these astrologers to apply the full list to the cycle of Jupiter. 

392) This list is that of the twelve ts'e, otherwise zodiacal signs which 
appear in Chinese hterature in connection with the astrology beginnings 
in the seventh century and not otherwise. Seven of them are mentioned 
in the Tso-tchuen, six of these seven, and four more are given in the 
Erh-ya. Tlie Shun ho, i.e. the eleventh of the Chinese list, is men- 
tioned in the Tso tchuen in 655 (5, VI, 9). — Compared with readings 
of the twelve Babylonian signs of the months, they present the follow- 
ing concordance : 

Bab, 1. shara, chief = shou, head, 10. Chinese. 
„ 2. gu, .= ho 11. „ 

„ 3. mur, = ivi 12. ,, 

„ 4. shu, = shou 1. ,, 

„ 5. bil, fire = ho, fire, 2. ,, 

„ 6. gi, look = hi, annals, 3. „ 

,, 7. du, = tche 4, ,, 

„ 8. e7igar, digging = hiuen Azao, dark hole, 5 „ 
,, 9. gan (KisLivu) = kiang lou 7. „ 

„ 10. (TebtTu) = Tsli TZE 6. „ 

,, 11. ash = ta Hang 8. ,, 

,, 12. she khi = shitchin 9. ,, 

The concordance fails only for the 8 and also for the 6 of the Chinese 
list : the latter's names for 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12 are double instead 
of simple but the the additional symbol does not impair the value of 
the other symbol. 

393) The first instance is mentioned in the state of Lu, in 639 b.c, 
{Tso tchuen). In the Li-ki, II, 11, iii, 29, the Duke Muh of Lu 
(409-377 B.C.) is said to have made a similar proposal which was- 
reproved. 

394) The practice however does not seem to have ever obtained any hold 
there, and is not known in any other part of the country. 

395) She-ki, kiv. 126, ff. 14-16.— W. F. Mayers, Chinese R. M., I, 172. 
— The god was represented as a man with four faces driving in a 
fairy chariot drawn by two dragons. Cf, Shan hai hng, (text and gloss) 
kiv. 12, f. 3. His name has been assimilated to that of a certain Ho- 
peh, spoken of as an ally of the Chinese in that region, under the reigns 
of HiA Ti Mang, 1st year, and his successor Ti Sieh, l6th year, in the 
Tchuh shu ki nien ; i.e. about 1813 and 1781 according to the rectified 
scheme of chronology. Ho-peh, i.e. Ho-pak was perhaps a local sub- 
stitution of Oh-pak, a god of fire and whose worship we hear in 540 
B.C. in the Tso tchuen in connection with fire worship, introduced in 
the state of Sung, apparently not long before, from the foreign source 
we are studying. 

396) The exact year of the suppression is not stated ; as Szema-tsien 
says simply that Simen-Pao, was the chief officer of Yeh during the 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 9S 

reign of the Marquess Wen of Wei who ruled from 424 to 387 B.C. 
393) Tso tchuen, under those dates. 
899) Tso-tchuen, 10, XVIII, 2. 

400) Hiuen-ming, 'Yiii. : Dark-obscurity. — Once entered into their pan- 
theon, this deity has been connected with a certain Siu or Hi said ta 
have been a son of Shao Hao, and Superintendent of Water under 
Tchuan-hiu (2227 b.c.) by the authors of the Han dynasty. Cf. Khanff 
hi tze tien, s.v. ming, 14 + 8, f. 22 t;., and Sacred Books of the Uastf 
XXVII, The Li lei, vol. I, p. 296. 

401) It is difficult not to be struck by the outward resemblance of these 
two names, as far as permitted by the Chinese orthoepy with those 
of Ahura-Mazda and Anro-Mainyus. Cf . Huei-luh which has no meaning 
in Chinese ; cf, also Anro-Mainyus, with Hiuen ming, anciently hun- 
meng. The Persians were ruling in Babylonia since 538 and on the 
eastern shores of the Persian Gulf for some time previously. 

402) Tso tchuen, 9, IX, 1. 

403) Cf. Tso tchuen, Ann, 5G5, 543, 541, 538, 532, and pass.—A short 
biography of this clever man is given in W, T. Mayers, Chinese R.M. 
I, 730, and more fully in T. Watters, A guide to the Tablets in a 
Temple of Confucius, Shanghai 1879, pp. 35-37. His tablet was ad- 
mitted in the temple in 1857, which is rather surprising if we consider 
his astrological performance of 541 B.C. Szema Tsien, She ki, kiv. 129 
has written his biography. 

404) Tso tchuen, Ann. 545 and 522 B.C. 

405) There are several references to this man in history. Szema- Tsien, 
She-ki, kiv. 28, f. 7 v. says that Tch'ang-Huang gave his services to 
the king Ling of Tchou (whose reign ended in 544 b.c.) At that time 
the Princes used to come no more to the court of Tchou, whose power -y 
was on the wane. Tch'ang-Hwang who was proficient in all matters 
concerning gods and j spirits, shot arrows on a pu-lai's head, other- 
wise a fox's head which symbolised the pu-lai, or non-coming of > 
the Princes . He hoped that this ceremony would have contrived them 

to come, but they did not yield. Afterwards a man of Tsin seized 
Tch'ang-Huang and killed him. The wonder sayings of the people of 
Tchou began with Tch'ang-Huang. — In the Tso tchuen, Ann. 492, 
par. 5, it is stated that he was put to death in that year by the people 
of Tchou. — Tchuang-tze says : X, 2, Tch'ang-Huang was ripped open; 
and in XXVI, 1 : " Tch'ang-Huang died in Shu, where the people 
preserved his blood for three years, when it became changed like 
green jade." 

406) Tao-sze-ism which has already been used by several continental 
scholars is used here as a convenient designation of the wonder- mon- 
gering school which has absorbed and transformed the philosophical 
Taoism of Lao-tze. 



96 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 



b) The Erythrccaii sea-traders and the Chinese Age of Wonderism. 

109. The results of the researches resumed in the foregoing paragraphs 
(103-107), throw some interesting hght on the state of things that existed 
during the 8th, 7th, and 6th centuries b.c. in the Arabian sea, the Persian 
gulf, and the intercourse between Babylonia and India. They suggest 
also that an important event must have taken place, which gave to the 
Erythraean Sea trade a greater impulse than before, and incited the mari- 
ners and merchants to ga much further than previously in search of new 
lands for their commerce, and thus reach the Southern shores of Shantung 
about 675 b.c. Such an event had really happened, as we shall see (§116) 
below, by the introduction of the Phoenician navy in the Persian gulf, in 
697-695 B.C., but its influence upon the extension of eastern sea tradehad 
not hitherto been suspected. 

110. Commercial relations by sea had existed from the earliest times 
between the Red Sea and the Aromata or Somali coast^^^ith'several em- 
poria of South Arabia, and between the latter and the Western, Northern, 
and IlTorth eastern shores of the Persian gulf.'-^^ Modern disclosures go far 
to vindicate the tradition, handed down by the Chaldean historian Berosus 
(c. 340-270 B.C.), that the civilizers of Babylonia had come by the Ery- 
thraean sea, and the Black-headed race, which in the old cuneiform texts 
was the traditional expression denoting originally their dusky skin,*°3 have 
been discerned, from the later arrived Sumero-Akkadians and from the 
Semites, on the neatly defined statues and monuments of olden times.'*^*' 
Since the reign of Gudea, i.e. about 2500 B.C., if not previously, Kushite 
traders '^^^ of the S. Arabian ports were carrying on their trade from Cop- 
tos''^2^ the Sinaitic peninsula, the Midian coast, and the Bahrein islands 
to Babylonia '^13. ^yt Jq ^\^q inscriptions of his statues where these names of 
stations are given, no reference is made to trade with any place of the In- 
dian coast. And an alleged proof of teak wood which would have been 
discovered in ruins at Eridu of 4000 b.c. has turned out to be the result 
of a misconception.*^^ 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 97 

111, Commercial relations between the Kushite emporia of South Arabia, 

the West coast of India, and the South as far as Ceylon, were perhaps ] , 
already opened^^^ at the time of the Xllth dynasty of Egypt, i.e. circa 
2400 B.C. This sea trade was certainly active in the seventeenth cen- 
tury, as shown by the Indian products brought back by the Egyptian fleet 
of the queen Hatshopsitu'"^, and later on they seem to have established 
colonies on the Indian coast, which they probably denominated by names 
which recall to mind those of their trading places^ ^' westwards. The Indian 
Ophir seems to have been one of them.^^^ Ancient India owes a great 
deal to the Sabaean traders,^ ^^ and by rebound to Egypt, but the matte*- 
requires a special enquiry, and can only be alluded to in these pages. 

112. At the time of Shalmanasar II., 828-825 B.C., commercial inter- 
course existed inland between India and the east of Assyria. On his 
Black ObeUsk, a rhinoceros, a yak, and Indian animals, such as an elephant 
and apes^^^ are brought as tribute bythc inhabitants of Mutsri, which lay 
to the north-east of Khorsabad, in the mountainous district now inhabited 
by the Missouri Kurds, and was therefore on the route of communication 
with India. The caravan road from the east must have passed through 
it.*2i The name of the monkeys seems to be the same as that of the same 
animals brought from South Yunnan by the traders of Shou-mi to the 
Chinese court about 1097 B.c.,*^^ and both represent the Dra vidian name 
of the monkey. *^^ More direct communications inland between Assyro- 
Babylonia aud India were established afterwards, and the Aryan-Indians 
of the Sapta-Sindu became acquainted with the legend of the deluge^^-* 
the armlet-weight mana^^^, and perhaps other things. *2^ 

Notes 

407) Aromata from there were used by the Egyptians as early as the 
IVth dynasty (Birch), i.e., following Mariette, 4235-3951b.c, 

408) Cf.onthat question my paper on An unknown King of La gash §13- 

29; B. & 0. R. Aug. 1890, vol. IV. pp. ] 93-207 Mr. T.G, Pinches 

has treated of several points of the subject in his Notes upon some of 
the recent discoveries in the realm of Assyriology, with special reference 
to the private life of the Babylonians, I. Principally from an inscrip- 
tion of King Gudea, about 2500 b,c. (Victoria Institute, Jan. 19, 1891.) 

409) Cf. the first part of my paper on The Black-heads of B abylonia /) 
and AncientJJhin.a; B. & 0. R.. vol. V. pp. 233-237. — On the name of 
their leader, cf. my suggestion on The name of Qannes In the Cuneiform '" 
texts, (The Acad. June 9, 1888), and on his half-fish form in mytho- 
logy: The fabulous fish-nien of Early Babylonia in Ancient Chinese 
legends, Sept. 1888: B.&O.R., 11,221-226. 

410) The Semitic Assyro-Babylonian type is well known. Cf. amongst 
others: J. Menant, Remarques sur les portraits des rois Assyro-Chalde'ens, 
1882.— The Black-headed civilizers of Babylonia, were neither long nor/^-i^ 



i\ 



98 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

round headed, with the forehead straight, the jaws orthognathous, the 
cheek bones prominent, the nose large and straight, the hair curly, and 
a dusky complexion. — The Sumero-Akkadians of Northern origin were 
,» round headed, with the nose prominent, the chin and forehead receding, 
and probably an olive complexion. — Cf. my paper on The Black heads, 
O.C ., and besides the monumental evidence, A. H. Sayce, The races of 
the Old Testament, 1891, pp. 137-140; and T. G. Pinches, Upon the 
types of the early inhabitants of Mesopotamia: Journ. Anthropol. Instit. 
Nov. 1891. 

41 1) On the name of the Kushites as a general appellative for the early 
populations of the sea-borders of the Arabian Ocean, cf. my paper on 
The Kushites, who were theyl B. & 0. E., Dec. 1886, L, 25-31, and 
supra, n. 351; also. An unknown King of Lag ash, n. 48. — Prof, Sayce, 
Lectures on the Religion of the Ancierit Babylonians, p. 434-435, and 
Races of the Old Testament,, pp. 43, 51, 143-4, objects to the applica- 
tion of the name at so early a date, because its antecedent Kash, which 
was only the name of a part of Ethiopia, was transformed into Kush by 
the Egyptians at a later period, and still later, extended to the region 
of Punt. As however he admits that the Kush, father of Nimrod, ac- 
cording to the old tradition, preserved in Gen. X, 6, 7, presents but a 
similarity of name with the first (cf. Lectures, p. 435-6), and as this 
tradition shows an early use of the name in the sense we attribute to it, 
early use which may have suggested the Egyptian alteration, I think 
that the name Kusbite may remain as a convenient, and not altogether 
inaccurate appellative. Let us remember that the leading tribes of 
Africa, now so called, (cf. The BljackJieads, §4), are for the most part 
immigrated from South Arabia. 

412) The foreign commerce reaching Coptos (mod. Kopf) was already so 
important in his time, that Pepi I., the second king of the sixth dyn- 
asty, had a special route made between it and the sea. Cf. G. Maspero, 
Histoire Ancienne, edit. IV., p. 81, The sixth dynasty, following 
Mariette, 3703-3500 e.g. 

413) For these identifications, cf. An unknown King of Lagash,TpaT. 17- 
23, and the references. Also T. G. Pinches, Upon the types. I.e. 

414) Two logs of alleged teak wood discovered in the ruins of Ur in 1854, 
and hitherto unconfirmed by any other find, had been too readily assum- 
ed to date from the foundation of the town, some 4000 years B.C., and 
thus have given rise to considerable speculation; but this was a mis- 
conception, as the said logs were siaiply the supports of cylinders of 
Nebuchadnezzar (b.c. 605-5G2), after that maritime communications 
with India had been opened, as we shall see directly. Cf. J. E. Taylor, 
Notes oti the ruins of Mugeyer, p. 264; J. E.A.S., 1855, vol. XV., 
and B. & O.K., vol. IV., pp. 205-207.— On sindu cloth, cf. below, n. 
428. 

415) The proof is not above suspicion. It consists of a shell of mother of 
pearl, such as those of Ceylon, which, inscribed with the cartouche of 
Usurtasen, was bought in Egypt in 1883 by Prof. Sayce, It may 
have been engraved long after the reign of that sovereign. Cf. -S. & 0. 
R., I. 29 n. 28 and IV. 202, n. 58.— I have not seen Mr. Emile Du- 
jon's UEgypte dans VInde 4000 ans. av. J.C., i'aris, Marpon, 1S84, 
and I do not know if he has been able to support his theory with any 
substantial proof. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 99 

416) This comes out from the fact that when the Egyptian queen Hatsepsu 
(or Hatshopsitu) of the eighteentli dynasty made her expedition of five 
ships to the Land of Pun, the following things were brought back from 
there: all kinds of precious woods, Anti-Gummi, Blooming Ana Syca- 
mores, ^aas-wood, I\7iesit-wood, ^/?a?«-metal. Balsam, Meslem or col- 
lyrium red, two kinds of monkeys, and leopard skins. J, D.C. Lieblein, 
Handel und Schiffart aufdem rothen Meere in alien Zeiten (Christiania, 
18S6), p. 2-4-35, from whom I take the previous list, shows that this 
expedition, and the products brought back must be distinguished from 
other products brought by another expedition which had just arrived 
from Nubia and Ethiopia, and consisted of living giraffes, leopards, ox- 
en, and ostrich eggs. And he refers to pi. 6 of Mariette's Der-eU 
Bahari, upper row for the first expedition's products, and lower row 
for those of Pun (including the monkeys), and blames this scholar as 
well as Lepsius and Maspero for having overlooked the distinction. Cf. 
also Dumichen, Die Flotte einef jEgyptisclun Konigin in dem 17. Jahr- 
hundert, 1868, table TI. p. 17; B. Graser, Das Sewesen der alien 
jEgijpier, in Dumichen, liesuUate, I. 1-27; G. Maspero, De Quelques 
navigations des Egypiiens sur les cotes de la mer Eryihee: Rev. Histor. 
1879, t. IX. p. 1-17. The name of these monkeys of Pun is given as 
]^ap or Gafi or Kafu, which seems to be the same word as the Hebrew 
Koph, Ape, in I. Kings, X. 22. The latter has long been looked upon 
(erroneously, as we shall see directly), as no other than Kapl, the San- 
skrit name for monkey, because it is among the products that were 
brought to Solomon from the Ophir lands by his Tarshish navy. (Cf. 
note 417). The names in the Hebrew text for ape, peacock, ivory, and 
sandal wood, were supposed to be derived from Sanskrit w^ords, with the 
exception of the sandal wood which was recognized as Dravidian. This 
was looked upon as a proof that at the time of Solomon (c. 950 b.c.) 
Sanskrit had penetrated southwards to the mouths of the Indus. But 
this inference was premature. The name for peacock has certainly a" 
Dravidian etymology (Caldwell, Dravid. Gramm., 1875, p. 91), while the 
name of Ivory is now traced through Egyptian to an Assyrian source 
(cf. Schrader, in Z. d. D. M. G., xxvii. 709). I am of opinion that 
the name for Monkey must also desert the Aryanists, as its source is 
most probably that of the Egyptian word previously cited, which is a 
verv old one in the language (as old as the language itself, says M. Le 
Page Renouf). Cf, the Egyptian cognate words ap and Kefien for 
cynocephale, in P. Pierret, Vocabulaire Hie'roglyhiqiie. pp. 20, 619, 
653 -MaxMuller, Physical Religion, 189i, p. 25, says: "Here then 
the single word Kapi may possibly indicate the route of commerce from 
India to Judjea and Phenicia, and from thence to Egypt, in the seven- 
teenth century b.c." But we have no evidence anywhere of such a route, 
and the ape gafi in question, was brought from Punt, or S. Arabia, and 
not all from the North. — The late Miss Amelia B. Edwards has given 
an interesting chapter on Queen Hatasu, and her expedition to the land 
of Pun in her last work, Pharaohs, Fellahs, and Explorers, 1892, pp« 
261-300, 

417) E.g. Muzirls (mod. Cranganore) on the Malabar coast, and Muza, 
their own emporium in the Red Sea, or perhaps better, Mitzir, Egypt. 
— Suppara, imod. Wasai, North of Bombay), and Zafar, in Yemen, 
Zabara in the Persian gulf, Sofala on the African coast, all probably 



> 



/ 



100 ORIGIN OF THK EARLY 

colonies from Zafar, the Safar of Gen. X. 30. — Min7iagara, near the 
mouths of the Indus, was perhaps a survival of the once famous name 
of the Minasans, the leading power of Arabia in olden times. The latter 
is only a suggestion. Generally the onomastic resemblances of this 
kind are mere pit-falls, and individual cases cannot be insisted upon. 
On the other hand, the strivinir after meaning, which supphes to pro- 
per names local etymologies, must not blind the enquirer upon genuine 
cases which have become transformed by the regional vernacular. 

418) I refer to the Ahiria of Ptolemy (TIL), the Abhira of the Hindu 
geographers, near the mouth of the Indus, which Lassen, Indisch. Al- 
terth. I. .057, sq,, II. 552, sq. had suggested to be the Arabian Ophir. 
The solution here suggested would solve many difficulties. — The Ophirs 
of Sumatra, &c. are names given by the Portuguese, as shown by J. 
Crawford, Descriptive dictionary of the Indian islands, s.v. Ophir. 

419) It received from them the Egyptian standard of weight. Of. my In- 
troduction to. ...Chinese coins, ch. VI. — But it did not receive from 
them the art of writing; the error spread by Tylor and others must be 
given up because it has no basis, as done by M. PhiUppe Berger, in 
his Histoire de VEcrlture da?is VAntiquite, 1891, p. 229-233 ; cf. Re- 
vue Critique, 4 Avril, 1'92. 

420) Cf. the remarks of W. Houghton, Mammalia on the Assyrian sculp- 
tures, Part II, Wild Mammalta, Tr. S.B.A., vol. V, pp. 319-320; and 
thoee of Francois Lenormant, Les no^ns de Vairain et du cuivre, 1879, 
S.B.A., VI. pp. 408-409. Cf. below, note 413. Mr. Houghton identi- 
fies the monkey in question with the Presbyter entellxtS, the Hamman of 
India, or some closely allied species. 

421) Cf. A. H. Sayce, Records of the Past, N.S., vol. I. p. l09, and 
vol. IV. p. 52, n. 2. The same country had been once laid waste by 
Tiglath-Pileser I., according to his own statements. Ibid. vol. I. pp, 
109-110. 

422) Udumi seems to be their name (cf. F. Lenormant, Z. f. cegyptische 
Sprache, 1875, p. 21; Schrader, Kedinschr. Geschichtsfors. p. 273; F. 
Vigouronx, La Bible et les dcouvertes molernes, 4. ed. III. p. 599). 
In the Chinese text Kudang is given (Cf. supra, ch. VL section d, par. 
46) . Both correspond to the Dravidian word for monkey: cf. Tamil 
anc. Kaduvan; Malayalma Kuranga; Karnataka Kodaga; Toduva Ko- 
dan; Badaga, Kurumba, Irula, Korangu; Malabar Kurangku; &c, in 
W. H. Hunter, A Comparative dictionary of the languages of India 
and High Asia, 1868, p. 140. 

423) This little fact would tend to show that the traffic was not then pas- 
sing through tlie Aryan Indians, if there was not the word banatl for 
elephant, which has been traced to the Sanskrit vasita (by Finzi, 
R/c.p.l. stud, dell^ ant. Astra, p. 291"), a name for female elephant 
cf. Pott, Ueher die Namen des Elephanten, in Hoffer, Zeitschr. II. 
36). — The yak is called alap n'ar Sakeya, i.e. river ox of the country 
of the Saka, following Lenormand, ibid. It would be the oldest men- 

•~^ tion of this people of western Turkistan, whom the Chinese called Sak, 
and not Sze as erroneously stated by some writers. 

424) Lenormant, Ort'gines de Vhistoire, I. 421-429, has shown that it is 
the Chaldean legend of the Deluge and not the Biblical, which has been 
the source of the story of Man and the fish, in the Satapatha Brdh- 
mana, of the Vlllth century, B.C. (tbid. p. 52) and later works. — The 




CHINESE CIVILISATION. 101 

latest translation is that of Julius Eggeling, The Satapatha Brdhmana, 
I. Kanda, 8 Adhyaya, 1 Brahmana; S.B.E. XII., 1S82, pp. 216. 19. 

425) The Assyro-Babylonian standard unit of weight, mana, is written 
phonetically ma-na, as if a foreign word, although sometimes by the 
first character only, in some contracts of the time of Khammurabi. The 
golden mand of the Rig-Veda, VI ' ., 78, 2, is looked upon by some 
scholars as a trace of Babylonian influence, but this view is strenlousld 
opposed by Max Miiller, India, what can it teach us ? pp. 125-6, any 
Biography of words, p. 115, who argues that the word does not mean 
a weight (of gold), but an armlet (of gold). Is this not on the contrary 
a proof in favour of the other view, considering that such was the shape 
given to gold and bronze currency in Syria, North Assyria, and the 
East, just at the time when this influence, which would be that of trade 
from these regions and not from Babylonia, could have been felt among 
the Vedic Aryans. Cf. also the paper of Prof. Johannes Schmidt, and 
the remarks of Prof. A. "Weber at the Eighth Oriental Congress of 1889. 

426) Cf. De Harlez, Introduction a Vetude de VAvesta, p. CCIII. — In the 
mythical geography, in the Vishnu Puranas and the Mahabarata; P. 
Jensen, Die Kosmologie der Babylonier, 1890, pp. 178-184. — Mr .J.F. 
Hewit, ISotes on the Early History of Northern India, in J.A.R.S. vol, 
XX., 321-363; XXL, 188-359;^ 527-582; XXII., 319-481; 527-603, 
claimed a connexion between the Akkadians and the Ancient Indians, 
but he has not established his case. 

• • 

113. Direct Trade by sea began early in the Vllth century and the 
older trade by land became active between India and Babylonia. It is 
probable that the goods were no more transhipped to ascend the Persian 
Gulf. Teak wood was brought and used at Ur during the reign of Nebu- 
chadrezzar,^27 jr^t a sort of textile called SM.hu, in which it has been 
suggested to recognize Sindu the Aryan name of India, ^^8 appeared earlier 
in a list of the time of Assurbanipal (668-648 b.c.) and on a contract 
dated in the 30th year of Nebuchadrezzar, i.e. 576 b.C^^ It seems 
howeyer that the tablet of Assurbanipal's time was a copy of another 
document, and that the Sindhu cloth may have been known some time 
before ; moreover its definition, cloth of the mountains, indicates an im- 
portation by land, and not by sea.'^^o The Buddhist Jataka Baveru gives 
evidence, as far as it goes, circa 500 b.c. of sea merchants from India 
going to Babylon and in the second occasion bringing there the first pea- 
cock for sale.^^^ These maritime relations were not easy and therefore 
could not be frequent, because of the difficulties of navigation by the 
dangerous and tempestuous straits at the entrance of the Persian Gulf, 
-'^ and along the inhospitable coasts of Gedrosia. 

Therefore communications by sea between Chaldjea and India 
began directly after the time of Sennacherib's Maritime campaign in 
695 B.C. 



1^ 



102 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

114. The Babylonians had never been a sea-faring people, and their 
navy of their various places on the banks of the Euphrates were only 
river boats, unfit to run on the high seas*'^ Hence was it that the 
trade had remained in the hands of the sea-farers of South Arabia. The 
Kushites of old had disappeared^^ ^ in the Xth century and their inheri- 
tance had been taken by the Sabasans, vs^hose capital was at Mariba, who 
jealously endeavoured to keep up the Monopole enjoyed by their prede- 
cessors. They may have carried it further east than the latter and have 
reached Arrakan and Pegu, but there is no clear evidence of the fact, ^3^ 
although they may have been incited to do so by the competition which 
they began to feel in the navy of Hiram, the Phoenician king, and of Solo- 
mon, from li:]izion-gaber in the Red Sea. 

115. Such was the state of things when the Assyrian Monarch Sen- 
nacherib II was confronted by a revolt which compelled him to reach by 
sea the district of Nagit of Elam, on the shores of the Persian gulf, where 
his former subjects the people of Bit-Yakin had taken refuge when they 
fled from his dominions. For that purpose, shipwrights from Syria 
Q HatW) built for him, at Nineveh on 4,he Tigris, and at Tul-Barsip 
(opposite Karkemish)*^^ on the Euphrates, sea-faring ships like those of 
their country, and he manned them with Tyrian, Sidonian and Cyprian 
sailors " whom he had made prisoners with his own hand^^'. He was 
thns enabled to embark with his army on board his own fleet, and invad- 
ing thus by sea his powerless foes, destroyed their towns and removed 
the inhabitants'^ 2^. Seven years later Babylon itself was partly destroyed 
by the same conqueror and remained waste until it was partly rebuilt in 
680 by Esarhaddon. Nineveh, the great capital of Assyria, was de- 
stroyed and disappeared for ever in 606 B.C. In the following century, 
539 B.C., Cyrus conquered Babylon, and the Assyro-Babylonian domin- 
ion existed no more. 

116. The appearance of Phoenician sea-going ships on the Persian gulf 
{Narru Marratu), was, over the crafts hitherto used there, a great im- 
provement, which we may easily appreciate from the figures represented 
on the Monuments of the period*^^. They presented most probably also 
a serious advance, vouchsafed by 250 years of maritime experience, on the 
larger ships which had been employed by Hiram and Solomon. And 
they were probably also better fitted, as sea-going vessels for long joarneys 
and rough weather, than those of the Sabseans, In any case they have 
proved to be a wholesome competition to the long enjoyed Monopoly of 
the latter, which the Assyrian Monarch seems to have had the project of 



I 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 103 

superseding. The attempt at an expedition in Arabia which was made 
in the last years of his reign, and was successful as far as it went, was 
a first effort to that effect, and show plainly that such were his inten- 
tions for the future. His submission of Addumu and Hagar (Hedjar) in 
the district of Bahrein, was the result of that campaign^*'*. 

117. After the naval expedition of 695, and the prisoners carried back 
to Bab-salimeti, the sea-going ships of Sennacherib are heard of no more; 
then useless otherwise they must have been engaged in commercial pur- 
suits in concurrence to the Sabaeans, perhaps on the command of the 
Assyrian Monarch himself. It appears evident that these new competitors 
brought a good change in the sea-trading routine of the South Arabians. *^^^ 
Being partly deprived of their old trade, though njt crushed since Sen- 
nacherib was prevented by death from pursuing his projects, but in fear 
of what might happen in the future, and unable to dislodge the new- 
comers, they made them their partners. The result was a great impulse 
to the previous navigation, and a large extension to the area within wliich 
they used to move. They vied betvYeen themselves for the discovery of 
new markets, and of places well fitted for the Nations which Greek authors 
tell us it was their custom to establish'' ''2. The remotest station estab- 
lished by the Sabseans when they were alone, and which was probably 
Lanka (Ceylon) could henceforth be looked upon, but as a resting place 
which enabled them to start anew further in the East^^'. 

ll^i'. The disclosures from the Chinese side, described in our previous 
section, with their positiveness, permit us to complete these informal in- 
ferences derived chiefly from the western facts known to history. They 
show how far these daring traders and sailors less than twenty years 
afterwards had carried their enterprises. As a fact they did reach as 
far as it was possible to go. The Shantung peninsula'^* and its rough 
South coast stretching eastwards was a sufficient barrier to prevent them 
going farther for about three centuries, and the gulf of Kiao-tchou, 
which we have noticed, (§ 103), was the best sea-port which could be 
found at proximity of the civilise! part of China. 

119. The character ethuDlogically mixed of these sea-merchants and 
sailors, should we not be aware of it otherwise, would he disclosed by 
the singular medley of innovations and items of western culture they intro- 
duced. Their influence in China continued for several centuries, but the 
nature of the notions they introduced altered gradually in course of time, 
and this change corresponded to that which had occurred at the fountain 



104 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

head, as we shall see during the follo\Ying period. At first the notions 
introduced were Syrian, such as that of stamping the currency and the 
use of the Mina of Kar Khemish**^ ; and Assyro-Babylonian, consisting 
in scraps of mythology and legends which the Chinese arranged and com- 
bined afterwards*'^ with the stories preserved amongst them from the 
traditional heir-looms of the ancient Bak families ; the most important 
were numerous notions of Babylon-an astrology, made of former scientific 
data div^erted from their original purposes, often corrupt and fragmentary, 
with a strong tinge of Indian views**'. 

And finally, i.e. at the end of the sixth century when the Persian had 
superseded the Babylonian empire, some notions of Mazdeism ap- 
peared. **8 

This transformation in the influence of the sea-traders in Shantung, 
resulting from and following the great events which happened at the 
fountain head of their trade, is certainly a most remarkable fact which 
deserves the attention of historians**^, and shows its veracity and 
genuineness. 



Notes 

427) Cf. note 414. — No other specimen of the same wood has been found 
in any other excavations in Assyro-Babylonia ; but in a tomb on the 
same spot, a truncheon made of bamboo, was discovered by the same 
Mr. J. E. Taylor, o.c. 

428) A. H. Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, 1887, p. 138.— The matter is I think 
open to a great deal of suspicion, Sadin of the Old Testament is 
not derived from the name of Sindu, India, as long supposed on in- 
sufficient grounds. Of. chapter VIII, below, the excursus on Sadin 
and Satin. 

429) Cf. W. St, C. Boscawen, Notes on some BahyIonia?i texts : B.& 
O.R. IV, 57-59, where it is suggested to be some unwoven silk. Was 
it not some tusser silk from India? 

430) Cf. below, the excursus on the Sindu cloth, in chapt. Vlll. — Cf, 
on Sindu, W.A.I. V, 28 : 19, 20 and 14 : 30 c ; II, 29 : 50 g; and 
in Brunn,'s List, 1799, 1951, 5500; and on Parsindu, W.A.I. I. 
21 : 69, 70. 

431) Cf. T. W. Rhys Davids, Jdtaka Baveru. Translated from the 
original Pali. No. 339, and my additional note, in B.&O.R. Dec. 
1889, vol, IV, pp. 7-9.— Prof. Minayeff thinks that the verses of the 
Jataka date from the beginning of the Christian era, while the prose 
text is attributed toBuddhagosha. Cf. Bullet. Acad. Imper. d. Sciences 
d. St. Petersburg, t. XVII, col, 77. 

432) Cf. E. Rehatsek, Emporia, chieflij ports of Arab and Indian inter- 
national commerce, be/ore the Christian era, p. 184 : J.B.B.R.A.S., 

1881, vol. XV. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 105 

433) Cf T. G. Pinches, The Babylonians and Assyrians as Maritime 
nations': B.&0,R., I, 41-42 ; T. de L., An unknoton king of Lag ash^ 
par. 20-25 and notes 48-52, 75 : ibid. IV, 198-203. 

434) Cf. G. Maspero, Histoire Ancenfie. p. 451-2. 
485) Cf. supra, ch. VI, f. 4, § 93. 

436) For this improved spelling of the name of Carchemish, Gargamish, 
&c. cf. Joachim ^lenant, on Karkemish, in the Mem. Acad. Inscript. 
et B.L., 1890, t. xxxii, p. 201, sq. 

487) " Mdla^he Currai Cidunna! Yavnai Kisidtai Qatdya ;" G. Smith, 
History of Sennacherib, p. 91, 1. 59-60, and p. 92-95 ; F. Lenormant, 
Origines de V histoire, III, 11. — Tlie ships being still empty passed from 
the Tigris, through the Araktu canal to the Euphrates which they 
floated down to Ubua where the king and his army went on board, and 
by the Bab-salimeti mouth of ih,^ Euphrates they entered in the Gulf. 
The king offered from his ship a sacrifice to Ea the god of the ocean, 
and threw in the sea, as offerings, little figures of ships and fishes in 
gold. Cf. G. Smith, History of Babylonia, p. 128-131. — There are 
some doubts about the decipherment of the word y a vn ai which Mr. 
Boscawen reads as one of tlie names of Cyprus. 

438) The place of landing and embarking on the sea shore are now all 
embedded by the alluvions of the rivers. Sennacherib's fleet went from 
the Euphrates to the sea in order to ascend the Ulai or Enlaeus river 
of Elam, which at present disembogues in the Euphrates. Cf. W. 
K. Loftus, Chald^a and Susiana, 1857, p. '281-2-*2, 424-426.— J.R. 
G.S.. 1855, p. 55. — W. F. Ainsworth, Travels and Researches in 
Asia-Minor, Mesoputainia, Chalda:a and Armenia!, 1842. — F. R. 
Chesney, The Expedition for the Survey of the Rivers Euphrates and 
Tigris, 1835-37.— H. C. Rawlinson, J.R.G.S., vol, XXVI, p. 136.— 
Rud. Credner, Ert;iingzungsheft zu Peterman's Mittheilungen, No. 56. 
— Fr. Delitzch, Wo lag das Paradies 1 1881. — E. Reclus, Geographic 
Universeile, vol. IX, p. 406-408. — Eberh. Schrader, Die Namen der 
Meer in den Assyrischen Inschriften : Ak. d. W. z. Berlin, 1877.— 
W. F. Ainsworth, A personal narrative of the Euphrates expedition, 
2 vol. 1888 ; The River Karun, 1890. 

439) Cf. the ancient boats of Chaldea in J. Menant, Glyptique Orientale, 
vol. I, pp. 65-99. from the gems and cylinders, and in Lenormant- 
Babelon, Histoire Ancienne, edit, IX, vol. IV, p. 231, and vol. V, p. 
105 and F. Vigouroux, La Bible et les decouvertes modernes, edit. IV, 
vol. Ill, p. 574, from the Sargon palace of Khorsabad; with those 
of Syrian built as figured at Nimroud, in Layard Monuments, vol. I, 
pp. 71. — On the small size of the ships, cf. my paper on An Unknown 
Icing of Lag (sh, n. 49, where I have neglected to notice the great 
maritime event of 697-695 b.c. — Let us remark that in the list of 
maritime terms of olden times published by T. G. Pinches in his paper 
on The Babylonians and Assyrians as maritime nations. I.e., there are 
no words referring to the sails of the ships, and therefore that the lists 
did not concern sea-going vessels. — Moreover it is well known that 
the -Babylonians had no timber, and in case of extensive buildings, the 
timber required was brought from the outside, 

410) Cf. G, Smith, History of Sennacherib, p. 167. The Assyrian suzer- 
ainty was extended by Esarhaddun. Cf. E. Budge, The history of 



106 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

Esarhaddon, p. 54-65. — Fox Talbot, The Second inscription of Esar- 
haddon : Records of the Past, III, 11 6-1 17. — G. Maspero, Histoire 
Ancienne, p. 453-4. 

441) In 60] B.C. Neko II of Egypt sent Phoenician ships around Africa, 
from the Red sea, a feat which could be more easily accomplished 
there than from the other side. On the credibility of the fact, cf. E. H. 
Bunbury, History of Ancient Geography, 1883, vol. I, p. 2S9-291 and 
296.— G. Rawlinson, Fhanicia, 1889, p. 175-180. 

442) Ex. Agatharchid. 10:^.— E. Rehatsek, O.C, p. 120. 

443) It is not impossible that they had yet readied P( gu from Lanka 
and the sea-coasting of West India. Cf. supra § 114, and references. 

444) It is not unlikely that the Chinese navy of later years has preserved 
some of the peculiarities of their ships, such for instance the two 
sculls at the stern. Another curious particularity is that of painting 
two eyes on the bow of the ship. We know tliat it was a frequent 
habit in the Phoenician navy, as shown by the figures of boats in terra 
cotta found at Amathonte and now in the New-York Museuui (cf. 
Perrot-Chipiez, Histoire de V Art, vol. Ill, p. 5 I 7, fig. 352). A late 
term in Assyro-Chaldsean written : vrood -f eye 4- boat, and read pan 
elippi (Brunn. L st. 9314) shows that the habit had been extended to 
the Erytlirajan sea-navy, pmbably in 697-695 b.c. The boats of the 
traders and colonists from the Erythraean sea, at Lang-ga and Tsi- 
moh had apparently such eyes, as we find these eyes sjiokcn of inthe 
fourth century B.C., and sucli boats designated as dragon boats. Cf. 
the Muh Tien tze tchuen, a work attributed to Lieh-tze, if not to one 
of his disciples. Huai-Nan-t/e in his Pen king hiun, (150 B.C.) 
speaks of the bow of the ships as made like a fish-hawk's head, 
yh shou. Yang hiung, about the Christian era confirms the statement, 
and so does Kwoh P'oh (a.d. 276-324). (Cf. I'ai ping yii Ian, kiv. 
769, f. 1 ; Khang hi tze tien, 196 -|- 10, yh, f. 74). On the modern 
practice in China, cf, John Barrow, Travels in China, 1804, p, 37 ; 
W. WiUiams, Middle Kingdom, I, 753. — The practice existed also in 
Egypt. Cf. G. Maspero, Archeologie Egyptiemu, p. 285, fig. 265 re- 
presenting a sailing boat of Ramses Hi (c. 1200 B.c). 

445) Cf. T. de L., Weights nnd Measures, forming the ch. Vll, of the 
Introduction to my Catalogue of Ancient Chinese coins. 

44G) We shall have to deal with this aspect of the question and endeavour 
to show some of the visible points of junction in their combined mythology 
and traditions, before the final conclusion of the present work. The 
fusion of the two sources of legends, and the points of contact which 
they had, but which have been the occasion by the Chinese historians 
of many unsupported assimilations, is an interesting but at the same, 
time a very difficult question. 

447) Cf. supra, § 103-1), and infra, 

448) (;f. supra, § 107, and infra. 

449) Not a few items ought perhaps to have been entered during this 
period, but as in some cases the evidence is not dated on the Chinese 
side, they will be noticed further on. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. IQ? 

» • • 

120. No record in any form, historical or fabulous that I know of has 
been preserved of the route they fullowed^^^. The myth of the Five for- 
tunate islands which we find connected with their sea-trade on the coast 
of Sliantung, is the only legend which conceals some vague indications 
on as many stations where they used to land, and on which it was their 
wont"*^^ to give as little indications as possble. 

121. But this fable is not the only source from which we may derive 
information on the matter. These sea-traders have left the name of 
Lanka in several places on their route from Ceylon to Shantung, a fact 
which we have already mentioned^^^^ amj it is not unlikely that the name 
of their emporium Tsih-me or Tsi moh has preserved under its folk ety- 
mology of the region a souvenir of another name dear to them^^a. That 
they were a mixed party from West Asia, S . Arabia and India, ia ascer 
tained, as we have shown from the hybrid character of the notions they 
introduced into China*^^. In our survey of the next period this will come 
still more prominently, and we shall have to record traces of their influ- 
ence which perhaps belong to the present period, but are not as yet suffi- 
ciently ascertained as to their date. 

122. The legend of the Five Fortunate isles, is a combination of the 
Hindu fable of the Kurma avatdra,^^^^ with some other Brahmanioal no- 
tions, and a memory of five places where the traders of the Indian Ocean 
used to put up before reaching the coasts of Shantung. The story is 
told by Lieh-tze*^^, who gives the names of the five islands as follows : 
1) Tai yii ; 2) Yuen kiao ; 3) Fang hu • 4) Yng-tchou ; and 5) Peng- 
lai^^^, east of Puh-hai (which is the gulf of Pehtchihli),*^? inhabited by 
Riahis (sien shing) whom an elixir of immortality, called tze-mai'^^^ (or 
Soma) preserved from old age and death. Through the machinations 
of giants from Lungpak, who were at proximity of the Fairy isles, and 
as a subsequent punishment were reduced to dwarfishness, two of the isles 
drifted northwards and sank in the sea. — The story is full of historical 
memories as we shall see further on. 

123. The Maritime intercourse, which by the sailors' tales, had given 
rise to this fable, seems to have come to an end before the middle of the 
fourth century at least so far as the Shantung coasts are concerned • 
but it may have lasted some time longer with the Southern re^-ion of 
Tchehkiang coasts which were then in possession of the state of Yueh 
who had her capital city at Lang-ya from 472 until 380 B.C., where it 




108 ORIGIN OF THK EARLY 

withdrew southwards, because of the internecine wars then raging. This 
cessation is shown by the fact that after that time, Chinese rulers made 
repeated efforts to discover the three fairy isles remaining and their elixir 
ot immortality. But having no navy, their maritime expeditions could 
never go far from the Chinese coasts *^^ Szema Tsien records that these 
expeditions began under the reign of King Wei of ts'i who ruled until 
332 B.C. and were continued under his successor Siiien of Ts'r, 382-313 
B.c„ and under King Tchao of yen, 311-278 b.c.^^o^ Ts'in She Hwang- 
ti himself yielded to the temptation*^^, as we shall see in a later page, and 
the folly continued during the Former Han dynasty *^2_ 

124, Although no identification has hitherto been attempted with the 
names mentioned in the above legend, we may venture to remark that, 
considering the circumstances of the case, namely that having been 
spoken of by the foreign traders of the Indian Ocean, with Brahmanical 
references otherwise unheard of in China, they ought to have preserved 
the memory of early settlements of Brahmanical Hindus in the Indian 
seas, or at least of places where the Hindu traders who told the story 
used to put up in their onward journey. We haye seen in a previous 
part that maritime expeditions from the eastern coast of India were al- 
ready made circa 500 b.c. and perhaps earlier*^3. 

125. We may recognize in Fang-hu the name of Bangka, which is still 
at present applied with an epithet to several places about the South- 
eastern end of Sumatra, and is preserved alone in that of the Banca 
island, in the same region^^^. A variant was Fang-tchang, (anciently 
Ban-tan) which reminds us of Bantam for Bantaii, a name of the Wes- 
tern end of Java.''^^ The other of the Chinese names Peng-lai is so 
much alike that of the country called Poll (Pali, Pari or Bari) which is 
said by all the Chinese geographers to be the Northern coast of Sumatra, 
and its neighbourhood to the Nicobar islands^^^, that we have only to 
register it. Yng-tchou, which means literally ' island of the great sea 
cannot be identified by the same process of onomastics, and a suggestion 
as to what place it was applied, may only result from further researches 
in all the circumstancial evidence of the case*^'. 

Notes 



450) A proof that sea-traders were going in high seas considerably south, 
is given by the astronomical statements coming from them, which 
Nearchos and Onesicritos have reported. Cf. on this interesting ques- 
tion, the just remarks of E. H. Bunbury, History of Ancient Geogra- 
phy, vol. I, p. 535. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 109 

Soma, ' the ancient intoxicating beverage of tlie Vedic Rishis. which 

451 ) We know that such was the case with the rhooenicians for their 
journeys to the Cassiterides. 

452) Cf. supra VI, c, § 44-. — On the coins which they issued there about 
675 B.C. cf. my Catalogue of Chinese coins, p. Ixv, 214. 

453) Cf. the following series where the ancient names are in italics : 
Sephar (Gen. X, 30) ; Saph ir regia, Sapphar methopohs, Sabe regia, 
Safar (near Sana) Zafar (Mahra), Zafar (Mirbat), all in S. Arabia ; 
Sofala (E. coast of Africa) ; Suppara (W. coast of India) ; Sumatra 
(Indian Archipelago) ; Samarade (E. Malacca peninsula) ; and Tsi- 
moh (Shantung). The latter was written at first Tsieh Mo (Bas. 1026- 
50). 

454) The mountain near the gulf of Kiao tchou is and was called Lao 
shan (Bas, 907-2275). The Shan hai king, last additions, kiv. 9, f. 
3 V... states that near it were Black people. Does not this refer to the 
swarthy complexion of the settlers and sea-traders of the Indian 
Ocean ? 

454^) The Kurina Avatara as well as the "Matsya Avatara originally belonged 
to Brahma. Cf, Muir, Sanskrit texts, IV, 923. Afterwards to 
Vishnu. 

455) Lieh tze, V. 3, who wrote (c. 397 b.c.) to the following effect : In 
the east of Puh-hai, were five mountains ; — As they were not fixed 

c by their base, they were floating up and down with the tide. The 
holy men inhabiting them, annoyed, petitioned to God (Ti) who, in his 
displeasure had left the islands float loose to the extreme west with all 
their occupants. Then he ordered Fm Kiang ( a god on which cf. § 
178) to send fifteen huge turtles which raising their heads supported ^y-^, 
the islands each three times alternately for 60000 years at every change. 
The five islands then did not move away. But in the country of 
Lung-peh (Lung-bak) were men of so enormous a stature that with a few ^ ^^--3 
steps they could reach the five islands, and take them at one fell swoop. -^ 

They attached together six of the turtles and carried them away, Two 
of the islands I'ai yu and Yuen Kiao drifted towards the extreme North 
and sank in the high sea. The immortals who were thus carried away, 
were more than lOOOOO individuals. God dissatisfied and in anger 
reduced the people of Lung-peh tu the size of dwarfs. Since the days 
of Fuh-hi and Shen-nung these men had been some ten tchangs high 
....On the islands, from the observatories one can see birds and beasts 
in gold and jade, also trees of pure white coral, all growing and living; 
there also is a juicy dainty {tze-tvel, Bas. 5161-1191, anc. tze-mai) which 
as a food prevents old age and death, (Instead of dying) the rishis 
(who have taken it) fly and wander for a day and a night and then re- . 
turn (to their body).^Cf, Shan hai king, kiv. 12, f. 4, gloss ; T.P. 
Y.L., kiv. 38, f. 8. 

456) Tai yu, Bas. 2293-10937.— Twen Kiao, Bas. 1246-2358.— /"an^- 
hu, Bas. 3826-1764.— rn(7 tchoti o3d8A9GS .—Peng-hai, 9127-9092. 

457) Eastwards because the starting was made in that direction. For 
instance India, by the sea-route, was east of the Chinese coast. Cf . 
Shan Hai king. 

438) The Chinese expression which is difficult to translate by itself, 
juicy-tasty, in its sound tze-mai seems to me a clear rendering of 



(sr^flfSt- 



110 THE EA.RLY CHINESE CIVILISATION. 

was believed to bestow immortality.' Rig-veda, VIII, 48, 3 : * We 
drank Soma, we became immortal, we went to the light, we found the 
gods ;' VIII. 48, 12. Of. F. Max Muller, India, What can it teach 
us? p. 224. — Careful and hitherto unsuccessful researches have been 
made in the Hindu-kush and the Oxus valley after the modern repre- 
sentative of the divine Soma plant " which the priest knows." Cf. R. 
Roth, Z.&D.M.G. XXV, 680-692 ; M-Muller, Biographies of words, 
p. 222 sq. ; 0. Schrader, Prehistoric Antiquities of the Aryan peoples; 
p. 326. 

459) In the second century, Chinese ships could not go much beyond 
the extreme point of the Shantung peninsula. Cf. She ki, iv. 28, 
f. 38. 

460) She ki, kiv. 28, f. 11 v.— The King Wei of Ts'i had begun his 
reign in 378 b.c. — M. Edonard Chavannes, in his translation of this 
chapter, Le traite sur les Sacrifices Fang et Chan de Se ma Tsien, 
1390, p. 25 n. has mistaken the first Siuen of Ts'i, for the second, 
and therefore given wrong dates. 

461) She ki, kiv. 28, f. 12. 

462) Namely in 133, 111, 109, 104, &c. b.c. 

463) Cf. supra, ch. VI, sect, e, div. 3. par. 64, 93, 114, 117. 

464) Cf. J. Crawfurd, Descriptive Dtcttonary of the Indian islands, p. 
31. Meaning of the name unknown. 

465) Cf. J. Crawfurd, O.C., p. 38. 

466) Cf. W. P. Groenereldt, Notes on the Malay Archipelago and Mal- 
acca, compiled from Chinese sources, Batavia, 1876, p. 80-84, for 
the statement that all the Chinese geographers make it to be the 
Northern coast of Sumatra, and its neighbourhood to the Nieobar is- 
lands. In the Liang shu a.d. 502-556, the kingdom of Poll is said 
to be 50 days broad aud 20 days from North to South, So large a 
country cannot be the present island of Bah as proposed by Pruf, L. 
de Rosny in Les Peuples Orientaux connus des Anciens Ch'nois, 1386, 
p. 141. — LomboK, near Bali, has been so called by Europeans, cf. J. 
Crawford, Descriptive Dictionary, p. 219. 

467) Wang T'ai, of the third century, in his geogrnphical work Kwah 
ti tchi has suggested the island called Tan tchou i.e. the isle of Quel- 
paerts, south of Corea. — There are however some variants of the name 
which are quoted in the San fu hwang tu, kiv. 4. f. 5 : Htvan-tchou 
(Bas. 6024-968) and Hwen tchou (Bas. 1275l-49e8) which suggest 
an imitation of a foreign name. Ihere are also in the same work some 
variants for the two other islands : Fang-hu or Fcmg-tchang is also 
called iiwart-wci (Bas. 1375-7296) ; Peng-lui h s.ho called Yun-shuk 
(Bas. 11952-4099) and Fang kiu (Bas. 117;i6-17) but these names are 
descriptive. Peng-lai is also said there to have on its east the YiX-Y 
(Bas. 12732-1808) or Barbarians of Kwangsi, suggesting thus an iden- 
tification with the isle of Hainan. 



ORIGIN OF THK BABLT CHINESK CIVILISATION. Ill 



126. The ascertained presence of Negrito-Pygmies in Indonesia from 
the Andaman to the Pliilippine islands, in juxtaposition to other races of 
men, is certainly a further point showing the truth of the story. No- 
where is the contrast more striking than between the Nicobarese and the 
Andamanese, living as they do in islands not very far distant in the Bay 
of Bengal. In the Lung-pak of the Chinese legend with'-, its giant in. 
habitants, we recognize without difficulty an approximate rendering of 
the old name of the Nicobar*^^ islands and their tall sized occupants^*'; 
while the dwarfs of the story are the Negrito-Pygmies *^° of the two 
Great and Little Andaman i.slands in the ncrth. And in the denomina- 
tion of Agathou daimonos nesos or Isle of good fortune, which the latter 
bear in Ptolemy, it is difficult not to recognize an echo of the same legend 
of the Fortunate islands which have reached the Chinese^^i. The part 
of the story which concerns the disparition of two of the fortunate islands 
in the North, through the machinations of the Lung-pak people, refers 
most probably to the behaviour of the Nicobarese*^^, skilful as they are in 
the management of their canoes, who used to cut off many sailing ships. 
The two islands, Andaman and Nicobar, which form really two groups 
but appear as only two islands in Ancient relations *'3, were thus lost as 
revictualling places for their ships, and the Ancient sea-traders were com- 
pelled to sail direct to Peng-lai, i.e. Pali, the North of Sumatra. Hence 
they proceeded to the China sea through the strait of Malacca, the only 
one opened to them, since the Sunda strait which has been erroneously 
called the great portal of the Eastern Archipelago in Antiquity, be- 
tween Bangka, or S. Sumatra, and Bantam or W. Java, and the Alas 
strait, were not yet opened, according to the Javanese records^^* recently 
published. Such is undoubtedly the truth or very nearly the truth which 
underlies the Legend of the Five fortunate islands, which was already 
known in China in the fourth century b.c.^'®. 

127. The remarkable feats of energy and bold enterprise which carried 
the sea-traders from the Arabian sea and the gulf of Bengal to the 
Shantung shores, during three centuries, disappeared without leaving 



112 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

many more traces of their passage, than those we have recorded *^^. Their 
scanty tales concerning their route were passing to mythology in the 
middle of the fourth century, and no sea-faring crafts acquainted with their 
art of navigation seem to have remained behind them. The more conven- 
ient route through Indo-China had diverted the traffic. 

128. The civilised Chinese, consistently with their inland habitat, before 
and after their settlement in the Flowery land, were not a maritime na- 
tion. They were well acquainted with river boating^^"^, but at the time 
■we have reached in their history, the sea-shores included in their domin- 
ion had not permitted them as yet to develop a navy ; and when the 
sea-farers of the Indian Ocean created their establishments on the Shan- 
tung coast, they deprived them of the opportunity of doing so. Thus 
when after the cessation of the maritime intercourse by the latter, the 
Chinese princes wanted themselves to send expeditions in search of the 
Fortunate islands, they had no sailors nor ships at their disposal to sail 
on the high sea. Their river boats could only crawl along the coasts ^'^. 
11' 9. The truth became apparent when at the end of the second cen- 
tury B.C., the extension of the Chinese empire towards the sea shores of 
Tchehkiang, and the non-submission of the native states of these parts, 
called the attention of the great Emperor han Wu-ti to the matter. 
The native populations of the S.E. coasts were " practised in aquatic 
warfare and skillful in the management of boats^^^ ;" they had sea-going 
ships which the Chinese had not ; perhaps had they learned something 
from the old sea-traders, although the state of uncivilisation of their 
country did not succeed to make it an attractive and lasting market for 
them. In order to incite maritime skilfulness and adventure, the Em- 
peror who had placed in an artificial pond of Tchang-ngan his capital in 
119 B.C., some figurations of the Fortunate islands each supported by its 
huge turtle*^*^, placed in another a sea-going ship of the model known in 
the S. East, about which all sorts of wonderful stories have been told^^^. 
This circumstance denotes the beginning of the Chinese navy. Maritime 
enterprise developed afterwards^^^, and we hear no more of the Fortunate 
islands, which only iguorance and incapacity could have maintained in 
the common belief until that time. 

Notes 



468) Cf. Long-pah with Lanka Bnrusae of Ptolemy, Lanka Bdlus, of 
the Arabs, Lika rdram of Rashid-eddin, Necu veram of Marco Polo, 
with the modern Nicobar of the Europeans and Nancowry of the natives. 
On these names cf. H. Yule, Marco Polo, vol. II, 290, and Notes on 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 113 

the oldest Record of the sea Route to China, 1882, p, 7. 

469) There are several races of them, but no Negritos. And they are 
somewhat like populations of Pegu and Burma. 

470) On these Negrito-pygmies, known as Mincopies, the best work is 
that of E. H. Man, The Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Andaman is- 
lands, 1884. — A. de Quatrefages, Les Pi/gme'es, 1S87 , has analysed 
all the data concerning them, pp. 98, l^9-i:08. 

471) Col. Yule I.e. has suggested that the name of Andaman unknown 
on the spot, may have been adopted from a transcript of the same 
name in Greek Ag-daimon. 

472) We might perhaps detect in the legend, a fainted recollection of 
the occupation of the Nicobar islands by some settlers of the continent, 
who being skilful mariners as they are still at present interfered with 
the foreign ships, while the Negritos who have little knowledge of 
seafaring were not pirate rovers. 

473) Cf. H. Yule, Marco Polo, vol. II, p. 290. 

474 The straits of Malacca, which were still unknown to Ptolemy 
were thus passed through by these early travellers. — Prof. J. W. Judd, 
in The Eruption of Krakntao (Royal Society, 1888), p. 7, has called 
attention to an important statement of the Pristaka Raja, i.e. the 
" Book of Kings " of the Javanese, which work containing the chron- 
icles of the Island, and kept secret during centuries in the Royal 
Archives, was onjy recently made public. It describes a treooendous 
eruption which occurred on the same spot in the year 338 Saka, i.e. 
A.D. 416, and it concludes by the following statement : ' Ihis is the 
origin of the separation of Sumatra aud Java.'' — The fact explains away 
many difficulties, in the geographical history of the region. — J. Craw- 
furd, Descr. Diet. p. 184, had noticed a favourite notion with Javanese 
chronologists that the islands of Sumatra, Java, Bali, Lombok and 
Sumbawa formed at one time a continuous land, and they Assign pre- 
cise dates preposterously modern, to the separations, viz. Sumatra from 
Java in 1192, Bali from Java 1282, and Lumbok from Sumbawa in 
1350. The dates therefore require correction. 

475) We have thus been led far in advance of any disclosure of Archoe- 
ological research in the ludian Archipelago, The oldest colony from 
Kalinga, in Java, is spoken of in b.c. 75, but the fact is ill ascertained 
although extremely probable. The old Kalinga country embraced 
Orissa, and we have seen by the researches of E. Forchhammer, that 
the colonists in Pegu about 500 B.C. had come from there. (Cf. suprd 
VI, e, iii, 64). Some other sources existed in Ancient Chinese lit- 
erature, than the legend of the Five fortunate islands, about the route 
of the old sea-traders who came to Shantung. This is shown by the 
variant Fang-tchang or Fang-hu, two distinct names, and by the fol- 
lowing fact. In 104 B.C. Han Wu-ti among other extravagances built 
the palace of Kien tchang at Tchang-ngan (cf. San-fu hwang tu, kiv. 
4, f. 5) north of which he made a large pond called Ta-ijh (Bas. 
1797-5020) where the Fortunate islands were figured, supported each 
by their large turtle (suprd note 455), Four names are given by Qze- 
ma Tsien (She ki, kiv. 28, f. 44),.viz. the three named {supra, § 122), 
3, 4, 5, and Hu-Hang (Bas. 1764-4257), The latter is too much 
alike the name of Ho-ling, Chinese transcription of Kaling, the name 



114 OKIGly OF THE EARLY 

given to Java by its Kalinga colonists, not to suggest an acquaintance 
with that name in the Chinese traditions of the period, either from 
the colony in question or from the mother-land in India. 

476) Some wonderful notions derived from the foreign sailors of Shan- 
tung have found a place in the later books of the Shan hai king. For 
instance in the sixth book concerningthe Maritime south, (f. 3) wearetold 
that every one in the Cross legged's slate was one of the Ptih sze min, or 
People of Immortals, who were of a black colour and lived for ever 
without dying. In the fifteenth book concerning tlie remote south, we 
hear again of the same people (f. 2v.) an 1 we are told 'that their name 
was 0. — In the Khang hi tze t/'en, s.v. sze, death (78 + 3, f. 33 v.) 
other quotations refer to the same myth. One about the yuen Fu 
shan, probably a corruption of the name of the second of the Fortunate 
islands (^suprd § 122), where a shrub of immortality grew, which state- 
ment is completed by a gloss of Kwoh poh. Another refers to a 
Tsu tchou (Bas. 7017-2381) an island of the sea where grows a grass 
of immortality (Liu meng Kwei). — Other passages of the Shan hai 
king refer to Sheng-tu (India) in tlie East (cf. note 497), for the big 
bamboos of Indonesia (cf, note 477); kiv. xv, 2v., refers to a race of 
spirit-men called Puh-t' ing -hu-yii, in the Southern Ocean ; they had a 
humap^ce, wearing as earrings_two green serpents, and treading on 
two red s_erpents, obviously a notion of Indlan'imagery, Cf. below. 

i 477) They were acquainted with the skinJioats, Kufas or coracles of An- 
terior Asia. Cf. suprti, ch. IV, a, 18.— For a definition under the Han 
dynasty. Cf. Tang kwan Han ki of a.d. l70. T.P.Y.L. kiv. 769, f. 
1. — Numerous inventors of the Wood-boat are mentioned: Hwang-ti, 
Yao and Shun hollowed trees to make boats; and they cut others long 
and thin to make oars (^Hi-tze, II, 16, App. Ill of Yh king). — Kung- 
ku and Ho-tih, Officers of Hwang-ti hollowed trees to make boats 
(^Shl pen). — Kung-tchui (Meh-tze), Yu ko {Lu she Tchun tsiu), Pan- 
yii (Shan-hai kingl, 8, 5), Hwa Kwa {Wuh li /«??), Peh yng (Shuh sih, 
Fei Meng ki), are each mentioned in these authorities as the first maker 
of boats. Cf. T.P.r.L., kiv, 76'?, f. 7 and 769, f. 2 ; Khang h, tze 
tien, s.v. — These fabulous statements suggest that hollowing a tree was 
the process of making boats among tlie natives of China like in early 
Europe, but there is no otlier statements to that effect than those 
quoted here. In the Shan hai king, kiv. 9, f. 1, it is said that in the 
country of the Tall men {Ta jen kwoh) they hollowed out (sioh : Bas. 
794) boats ; but this fabulous country was somewhere along the 
eastern coasts of Corea. In Northern Tibet, M. G. Bonvalot, Across 
Thibet, vol. I, 1891, has seen such boats. — In the Shan hai king kiv. 
17, f. 1, an alhision is made to bamboos large enough to make boats, 
growing in the fields of the Wei hills which are not identified and 
belong to romantic geography. The notion of such bamboos had come 
to the author from the sea-traders of Indonesia, where it is a fact, that 
boats are made of a section of bamboo between two knots. Ctesias 
had already spoken of them. C. Acosta in his Tractado de Iks Dro- 
gas....de las Indias Orientates, (Burgos, 1573) f, 296 mentions those 
of Malabar. And Clusius had seen two large specimens brought from 
the Indian Archipelago in the University of Leyden. (Cf. Yule-Bur- 
nell, Glossary of Anglo-Indian Word$, p. 41-42). But such boats have 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 115 

never been made in China (because bamboos wide enough do not grow 
there), and the statement to the contrary in G, Schlegel, Urav.ographie 
Chi noise p. 3i7, is based upon the fanciful work of Ogilby, who lias 
applied to China, the very words of Christ. Acosta referring to Mala- 
bar. — River boating is mentioned by the Chinese records since their 
beginnings. Neglecting the references to single boats, there are some 
interesting cases worth noticing. When Wu Wang, founding the 
TCHOU dominion, invaded the country then ruled by the Yn dynasty, he 
crossed the Ho river on forty-seven boats provided by Liu Shang. (Cf. 
Tai hung luh tao ; T.P.Y.L., kiv. 778, f. 6). And when ts'iN made 
its campaign against ts'u, one thousand river boats large and small, 
were built for that purpose. Shuh wang pen ki \ (T.F.Y.L., kiv. 
769, f. 2). 

478) The expedition of Sin fu .seems to have reached unwillingly the 
Corean island of Quelpaert. 

479) Memorial of Yen-tou to the Emperor in 134 b.c. (cf. 2'sien Han 
shu, kiv. 64 ; Trsl. Wylie, p. 37). Concerning the populations of 
Min Yueh, i.e. Fuhkien. 

480) Cf. note 455. 

481) It was called a Yu tchang (Chinese name of the S,E. region) boat 
and was said to carry a myriad of men {3Jiao k'i). — The San fu ku 
sze says that there were several of them, battle-ships and ten storied 
boats, in the pond of Kwen-ming. Cf. San fu hwang tu, kiv. 
4, f. 3-4. 

482) The progresses of this navy were however very slow. During the 
first Han dynasty, one thousand kin, i.e. about fifteen tons, was enor- 
mous for a boat. Cf. T.F.Y.L., kiv. 769, f. 7, v. In the third cen- 
tury, according to the statements of the Wei tchi (^San kwoh tchi) 
Maritime intercourse was carried from the gulf of Petchili to S. Co- 
rea and Japan ; from then to the Liu kin islands (the country of the 
Pygmies or 2'chnja); hence in the S.E., after a year of navigation, 
the ships reached as extreme limit the Lo or naked men country (Ni- 
cobar) and the Heh-tchi or Black teeth country (where they chew betel). 
Beyond the sea of Kwei-ki, i.e. Tchehkiang, \i%r%i\xQTung-ti ;e?i form- 
ing more than twenty (not 2000 as wrong in Ma Tuanlin) states (the 
Philippine islands, &c.) From Kwei-ki and from Tung-ye (Fuh kien) 
one could not reach Tan tchou i.e. Quelpaert, and Y tchou, i.e. Japan?, 
except when carried away by the winds, and coming back was difficult; 
but people from there used to come to Kwei-ki for trade purposes. — 
The statement of the Hou Han shu, that Japan situated in the east of 
Kwei-ki and Tung-ye, was near Tchu-yai and Tan-erh (i.e. the Hai-nan 
island), can thus be understood, since it was by way of Japan that the 
ships used to sail south. The part played by Japan under this respect 
is interesting, as the navy in question was foreign to the country ; and 
Prof. Basil Hall Chamberlain, in the introduction (p. xxv) of his trans- 
lation of the Kojiki, has remarked that even so late as the middle of 
our tenth century, navigation was in a very elementary stage and the 
art of sailing was but little practised by the Japanese. Mr. E. Bonar, 
On Maritime enterprise in Japan : Trans. As. Soc, Japan, 18"~^7, xv 
103-125, has concluded from his special researches that, until a fai 
later period than the end of the IXth cent., rowing was all the Japan- 
ese knew about navigation. The attention paid to the ships of Fu- 
nam (Cambodge and Siam) which visited the Chinese Coast in our third 



116 ORIGIN OF THE EABLY CHINESE CIVILISATION. 

century, and are noticed in the Wu sh'i Wat kwoh tchuen is interesting 
under that and other respects. They were wooden ships of twelve sin 
long (about 96 feet) and six feet wide ; haying in front and behind 
the form of a head and a tail of a fish; cramp irons made them stronger, 
and they were large enough to carry one hundred men ; the men had 
oars long and short, and also poles; and they were thus fifty, or more 
than forty, from stem to stem on each side of the ship ; they used 
their oars according to the necessities of their course ; when seated 
they used their shorter oars ; in case of shallow waters they all used 
their poles, and in pushing off, they all sang together as a single man, 
(Cf. T,P.Y.L., 769, f. 5.) 



c) Influences from the South West and the beginning of Taoism. 

• 

130. We have seen in a previous part that Shou-mi traders of the west 
•centre of Yunnan, who came to the Chinese court about ] 100 b.c, liad 
relations with India ;^S3 but nothing wbatev^er is known of the frequency 
and nature of these relations. From the Burmese sources,^^* we have 
learned tiiat Hindu colonists under the leadership of the Indian prince, 
Abhiraja, coming through the inland Eoute, had settled at the old 
Tagoung on the Irawady, three centuries before the time of Gautama, 
therefore about 800 b.c. ; and also that a second colony, about 500 b.c. 
had come by tbe same route and settled like the first on the banks of the 
same river, but on the eastern side and at another place ;^^5 yvjijie the 
first colonists by sea did not come from Orissa to Pegu previously to 500 
g_(..486 There is decidedly no evidence that any outside communications 
have been established there by the sea trade^^^ previously to that time, and 
any speculation based on the existence of such an early trade, as we made 
once before, is unsafe and probably wrong.^^^ 

131. The important and well stated fact is that inland communications 
existed between the central Noi^i of India and Burma in the eighth cen- 
tury, and communications from them, directly or indirectly through the 

. tinerant traders of Shuh, became henceforth possible with central China, 
where was the great and Semi-Chinese state of ts'u. There is no historical 
record thatsuch latter communications took place, but we are justified in 
assuming that they did, by the infiaencej)roduced in philosophical litera- 
ture, superstitions and practicesy^^^ and perhaps also on some arch^o- 
ogical remains in the South-west,^^*^ influence which could come but from 



118 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

India direct or through them. This influence was one from Brahmanism^ 
and beginning about 600 B.C. lasted until the last quarter of the third 
century B.C. when it was superseded by Buddhism, as we shall have- 
occasion to show farther on. As the symptoms of archfeology and 
superstitions appear more clearly during the next period, we must refer 
to that time our survey of their historical and ethnological character.'*^^ 

132. On two distinct points, the S.W. influence came to its full effect 
during the fourth period, one concerning material progress, the other phil- 
osophy. The sea-traders of the Indian Ocean settled at Tsih-moh, had 
introduced about 675 B.C. the western system of stamping the actual 
currency,4^2 which in China happened to consist of small bronze imple- 
rnent^ of daily use, while in the West it consisted of ingots, of useless 
shape. Some seventy-five years later, more precise notions of the "Western 
System of coinage than heretofore, reached China ; but then it came 
through from the inland south and reached the state of ts'u, where small 
-^ingots of bronze, bean shaped as the old Lydian coins, and stamped, 
-; were issued by Sun Shuh-ngao for his prince js'u TchwangjwEtng, about 
600_^.c. They are known in native numismatics under several soubri- 
quets, the best appropriate being that of Me tallic c arries (Ho j)ei tsien), 
because their shape suggested that of the once useful little shells they 
superseded. ■i^'^ This precised notion differing from that introduced and 
entertained in the east of China, cannot have reached the southernmost 
of the Chinese states otherwise than from the south, and most apparently 
from the west through the Indian route, inasmuch as it seems probable 
that the earliest cast copper coins of India, cut bits and bean shaped date 
from that time.*^* 

133. A western contrivance which was introduced about the same age 
is that of the Kao^^^ to draw water from a well. What it was exactly 
must be inferred from the description handed down by Tchwang tze of 
the fourth century b.c, quoting the words of Confucius and of one of his 
disciples about it,^^^ which correspond exactly to the shaduf as we see it 
figured on a slab of Sennacherib,*^' and on Ancient Monuments of 
Egypt.498 

Notes 

483) Cf. supvii, ch. vi, sect, d, § 46, and also note 422 on the name of 
the monkey they brought with them. 

484) The historical writings of the Burmese have been pronounced by 
the great authority of Lassen *' to deserve on the whole the praise of 
credibility." {Tndische Alterthumskimde, vol. IV, p. 369) ; a judg- 
ment fully endorsed by Sir Arthur P. Phayre, in his History of Bur- 
ma, 1883, p. vii. 



CHINESE CIVILlSAXrON. 119 

485) Cf. supri, ch. VI, sect, e, div. 8, § 65. 

486) Cf. supra, ch. VI, sect, e, div. 3, § 64, and references there to 
the researches of the lamented Dr. Em. Forchhammer. We shall see 
later on, that it was this inland route which in the IVth century sup- 
planted the sea-trade to Shantung. 

487) Of course there is no impossibility to the fact, but we do not find 
any traces of it, and the statement supra (ch. VI, sect. f. div. 4, § 
93) that the sea-trade of the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal seems 
to have begun during the third period (1100-770 b.c.) is far too posi- 
tive. I have now found that the Ring money of China referred to there 
was a western notion most probably introduced by the tchou and 
established by them in 1091, (or the 1032 B.C. of the Bamboo Annals) 
and probably beai-d of again by tchou Muh wang during his expedi- 
tion in the West of China. (Cf. Intro Miction to the Catalogue of 
Chinese Coins, ch. I, Ann. 1103-1032-1091). It was not due to the 
sea-trade neither of the South nor of the Kast. 

488) Dr. J. Edkins, in the papers noticed supra, note G78, had assumed 
the existence of such maritime communications since an early date, 
and the presence of the Chinese in the South of China proper at the 
same time, but both these assumptions are historical errors, unsup- 
ported by any evidence of any kind. 

489) It might be asked if the Shindu cloth qv textile which is mentioned 
in the Assyrian inscriptions since the time of Assurnatsirpal (883- 
858 B.C.) does not refer to silk and to the name of India, hence to 
Chinese silk imported through India. We shall examine the question 
in a special excursus of chapter VIII. 

490) Let us mention here : — 1*^, the horse-shoe shape of the tombs which 
spread from the south up to Corea, and which is clearly a figure of 
the Yarn. It was already practiced in the time of Confucius, but not 
as a general custom. (Cf. Li ki, T'an kung, I. (3) 26). On those 
of Corea, cf. W. R. Carles, Life in Corea. 1888.-2°) the Wa /can 
pillars, on which more below. 

491 ) Below, part III, sect. B of the present chapter. 

492) Cf. supra § 104. 

493) Cf, my paper on The Metallic cauries of Ancient China, 1888 ; 
J.R.A.S., vol. XX, p. 428-439 ;— Catalogue of Chinese coins from the 
British Museum, 1892, p. xii, liii, and Nos. 1575-8. 

494) Cf. Sir Alex. Cunningham, The Ancient Coins of India, 1891, p. 
54-60. — Edward Thomas, Ancient Indian weights, 1874, had remarked 
that in numismatic finds, these Indian coins were old and worn, while 
the Greek coins found with them look quite fresh, Cf. p. 55, sq. — 
According to V. A. Smith, Gra^co-Roman influence on the civilisation 
of Ancient India : J.A.S.B., 1890, vol. Iviii, they were thought at first 
to belong to a much older period. 

495) Bas. 4452._In Khang-hi tze tien, 75-1-11, f. 89 : a machine to 
draw water from a well. — Shwoh wen, id. — Medhurst, Chin. Engl. Diet. 
p. 396 : An implement for drawing water by pulley. — The preceeding 
description is perhaps somewhat stretched. Joined with another word, 
Kieh-kao (Bas. 4236-4452) it is translated in Basile : Putei machina 
seu cylindrus, — In W . Williams, Syll. Diet. p. 325 : A well-sweep; 
they are much used in irrigating lands near rivers in the Northern 



120 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

provinces. Also a water-wheel worked by the feet. — J. Eitel, Cliin.. 
Diet., p. 268 : A windlass over a well. — These various descriptions 
show that i\\Q original Kao, was different. — The water-wheel now so 
extensively used in China, and which is much like those of Syria, and 
the North of Persia, is said to have been invented by Ma Kiun of the 
fourth century, who is supposed to have heard about it from India. 
Cf. supra, note 209. An accurate drawing of one of these wheels is 
given in Stanton's account of Earl Macartney's embassy, \ol. II, p. 
480. There are two appliances of that kind used in China, the chain 
pump, and the bamboo water-wheel. Cf. J. F. Chinese, The Chinese, 
1844, vol. Ill, p. 80-84.— John Barrow, Travels in China, 1804, 
p. 540. 

496) Cf. Tchwang tze, kiv. xii, § 11 : Tze kung coming from Ts'm and 
arriving North of the Han river where it was not known (therefore in 
Honan W.) describes it to a gardener : ' It is a lever made of wood, 
heavy behind, and light in front.' And in kiv. xiv, § 4, Confucius 
says : '' When it is pulled, it bends down ; and when it is let go, it 
rises up." Cf. Sacred Books of the East, vol. xxxix, p. 320, 353. 

497) Cf. G. Rawlinson, Herodotus, 1875, vol. I, p. 315. — Layard, Nin- 
eveh and Babylon, p. 109. 

498) The Egyptian shaduf. An early Akkadian collection of agricul- 
tural proverbs say : ' The irrigation machine he puts together ; the 
bucket he hangs, and the water he will draw up.' A. H. Sayce, Her- 
odotus, p. 111. — In Akkadian it was written i d - 1 a I ^^^ ]— linxxd- 
balance, in Assyrian dulati. Cf. W.A.I. II, 14, 1. 17. Also Brun- 
now, List 6624. — Wilkinson, Manners and Customs of the Ancient 
Egyptians, I, p. 53, and II, p. 4. 



134. It was by the same route that Hindu thought and philosophical 
speculations were brought to the cognizance of the Chinese, in the Vlth 
century, b.c. Li Lao Tan or Lao-tze, "the old one," once Keeper of the 
Royal Archives of the Tchou dynasty, worked undoubtedly upon Hindu 
Ideas and suggestions^^^ when he taught to his disciples, his Taojeh King, 
a work unique in character, and the most abstruse of Ancient Chinese lit- 
erature. Established at first in the state of Ts'u, the southernmost of the 

-/ Chinese states, whose geographical position was commanding all intercourse 
with the South-west, he had every facility to be acquainted with the above 
ideas; and as suggested by the late journey to India attributed to him in 
his legend, he may have travelled westwards, at least as far as the Shuh 
country, which was in direct cotnmunication with the land of the Brah- 
mans, or travelled to India himself, unless he be himself a foreigner from 
those parts, s^'^which case, if established, would solve many difficulties. He 
quotes himself from older works, but not in the usual Chinese way of re- 
ferring to Antiquity.^"^ 

135. Several copies of his teachings, varying in accuracy, completed- 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 121 

ness, and subsequent additions, out of which has been edited the present 
work about the third century B.C., seem to have circulated at first between 
his disciples. The text has obviously suffered in the transcriptions of one 
style of writing to another,302 but on the whole, the work can be safely 
looked upon as authentic.^^^ It has been translated a dozen of times into 
European languages. ^'^^ But the literature of the work, both Chinese and 
European, appears to indicate^''^ that a knowledge of the language and a 
philosophical training do not sufifice to gain a correct understanding of it. 
1S6. According to probabihties Lao Tan was of foreign extraction, 
and the Chinese writers of later ages have been unsuccessful in their at- 
tempts at putting a clearly Chinese complexion on the few statements 
which posterity has handed down about him. He Avas an exceedingly 
clever man, already grey haired when he appeared, in the state of ts'u, : 
the great principality which was then commanding all possible intercourse 
with the South and South-west. Since 604 B.C. was the date of his birth 
(probably following his own statement), he ought to have appeared not 
before 540 b-c, and his designation of Lao-tze, the ' Old one ' was de- 
rived from that. He was besides qualified of Tchung erli or ' Doubled 
eared,' and also of Ta7i or ' Flat eared,' from the circumstances that he 
had long ears pierced (in the fashion of the Shans and Burmese), a pecu- 
liarity which suggests that he may have come from the region in Burma 
where Abhirrja had established his Brahmanical settlement two centuries 
before^^^ and where this custom obtained^^^. His alleged surname Li 
(plum) may also be argued as suggesting the southern origin of Lao 
Tan ; he selected it himself and it was not a Chinese surname before his 

137. Szema Tsien in his short biography of the great philosopher, 
knew nothing of his birth, and about his death says that it was not 
known when and where he died.^*'^ He states however that he was a 
man of ts'u, who become keeper of the Archives of tchou (at Loh-yang) 
where he was visited by Confucius in 517 b.c. ; he relates the conversa- 
tion of the two great men,^^^ and how, when he had resigned his post, 
and going away through the (Han-ku) passage (of S.W. Honan, there- 
fore going westwards) he left with the keeper of the gate his work of a 
little over 3000 words in two parts on the Tao and Teh.^^'^ Therefore 
there is sufficient ground to assume that Lao Tan, the Old long eared 
man, was a foreigner who came and settled in China for a certain time. 
Considering the facihties offered to Szema Tsien and his father for collect- 
ing their information, and the interest which Szema Tsien himself dis- 



122 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

plays for Taoism, it cannot be admitted if Lao Tan was a Chinese bom 
and dead man, that they should have been unable to supply more data 
to their readers, on so remarkable a man. 

138. The details furnished from later sources have a tinge of wonder- 
ful, but the sober statements which they contain, confirm rather than 
infirm the probability that Lao Tan was a foreigner of the South. The 
Yu li of Tchu Han, 512 j^ the Ilird cent., said that he had a yellow com- 
plexion, beautiful eyebrows, long ears, large eyes, a wide forehead, parted 
teeth, a square mouth and thick lips, therefore a rather un-Chinese ap- 
pearance.5^3 He was reputed to have travelled extensively, as far as Ta 
Tsin, i.e. Dakshina or South India, and Ken-tuh, i.e. Hindu or North 
India. These statements, however valueless they may be so far as they 
relate to real facts of Lao Tan's life, show certainly the feeling that ex- 
isted amongst his followers about a connection of hia with India, and are 
interesting to notice in support of the views we have expressed. 

139. His work shows that he was acquainted with Chinese notions as 
well as with Brahmanical speculations of ontology.^^* He started from 
the notion of the Right Way or Tao of the Shu king, and expatiated it 
as the Reason of nature and the first principle subordinating all creation. 
The treble aspect of the Tao, described in the fourteenth chapter, which 
was the object of the funny view that it might be a reference to Jahve, 
is most clearly a Hindu notion connected Vith similar views in the Rig- 
veda and the Brahmanas.^^^ 



Notes 

499) Prof. Ch. de Harlez says rightly : " La doctrine de Lao-tze resem- 
ble en bien des points k celle des brahmanes; le Tao-te-king concorde 
d'une mani^re frappante avec I'expose philosophique qui commence les 
Lois dv ]\Lvr,ou. II y a done de grandes probabilites que I'auteur du 
Manuel Lao-ien ait cherche des inspirations dans 1' Inde ; mais a ce 
qu'il y a puise, il a imprime le caractere de son genie et en a fait un sys- 
terae a lui qui porte a bon droit exclusivement son nom." Les Re- 
ligions de la Chine, Apergu historique et critique, Leipzig, 1891, pp. 
177-8. — Cf. also, but with caution. G. Pauthier : Memoire sur V 
Origine et la Propagation de la doctrine du Tao, fondee par Lao-tsou] 
traduit du Chinois et Accompagne d' un commentaire tire des livre3 
Sanskrits et du Tao-te-king de Lao-tson, etablissaut la conformite 
de certaines opinions philosophiques de la Chine et de rinde,,...suivi 
de deux Oupanichads des Vedas, Paris, 1831, 8o pp. — Dr. E.J. Eitel, 
Outlines of a history of Chinese philosophy, states that Lao-tze's 
ideas of transmigration and annihilation show that he had some con- 
nection with India. Cf. Travaux du Ille Congr. Internation. Orient. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 123 

St. Petcrsbourg, 1376, vol. II, p. 7.— Prof. R. K, Douglas, in The 
Academy, Apr. 25, 1885, favours also an Indian origin for his sources, 
and suggests that his name Li being that of a non-Chinese tribe may 
show his foreign origin. Anyhow we may remark that Li, plum, is 
said also to have been given to the child because he was born near 
such a tree, and that such a custom is not Chinese. — The XlVth chapt. 
of the Tao teh king contains the description of three ontological con- 
ceptions, /, hi, Wet which have given rise to a great deal of controversy. 
Several of the Ancient Jesuit Missionaries, — Abel de Remusat, Me- 
moire siir la vie et les ouvages de Lao-tseu, 1823, (Mem. Academ. d. 
Inscript. torn. XII) p. 23, — V, v. Strauss, Lao-Tse Tdo-Te-king, 
Leipzig, 1870, — P. Perny, Grammaire Chinoise, II, 1876. p. 311, 315, — 
Julius Grill, in Ztschr.f. AUtetsam. Wisse7is., V, 1, 15. — support the 
extraordinary view that the three words are a transliteration of the 

name of Jehovah. On the other hand, G. Pauthier, Me'moire du 

Tao, 1831, pp. 32-37, who makes it an Indian notion, — Stan. Julien, 
Le Livre de la Voie et de la Vertii, 1842, pp. iv-viii, — J. Chalmers, 
The specidations on Metaphysics, polity and Morality of Lao-tze, 1868, 
— C. de Harlez, Lao-tze, Bruxelles, 1885, p. 10 ; Le nom de Jehovah 
a-t-il ete conyiu des Anctens Chinois, Sc. Cathol, 1 8S9, Avril, — H. A. 
Giles, The Remains of Lao-tze, Re-translated, 1888, — G. v. d. Gabe- 
lentz, Life and Teachings of Tao-tze : 1889, China Review, vol. XVII, 
p. 139, sq., who says that wei being a^nciently pronounced tni, the 
name of Jahveh cannot be recognized in /-Ai'-fn?',— and J. Edkins, On 
I he -wei in the Tao-teh-king : Chinese Recorder, vol. XVII, p. 306 
sq., who thinks that Lao-tze may have got from India a notion of 
a(?) Babylonian trinity, — all refuse to accept the Jehovah theory which 
ought never to have taken so much time before being dismissed for 
ever.— The three terms /, hi, wei, which in olden times were dzet, ki 
and m', singularly correspond to the tad, svad and kama of the Rig 
Veda, X, xi, and it is most probable that Lao-tze had been acquainted 
with it. 

500) In the following paragraphs 136-138, I have collected the reasons 
that make to beheve that Lao Tan was an Indian. 

501) Ku, ancient, is the usual word used in classical hterature when re- 
ferring to the Ancients or Antiquity of China, in the Shu king, as in 
the writings of Confucius, Mencius and others. In the occasion referred 
to, Oh. XLI, Lao-tze says : Ku klen yen yu tcht, litt. ' therefore es- 
tablished words there are.' This peculiar mode of quotino- another 
work seems to me to suggest a foreign source. See below n. 515. 

502) I am thoroughly convinced that if we had the original text of the 
Tao teh king in ta-tchuen in full, instead of isolate characters, we could 
give a better and clearer edition in modern text than is at present 
known. I have already pointed out discrepancies of transcription in 
the text. 

603) The authenticity of the Tao teh king had never been challenged 
until Mr. Herbert A. Giles, one of the best translators of modern Chi- 
nese, assailed it vigorously and in an unmeasured manner. The Remains 
of Lao-tze retranslated : Chin. Rev. 1886-1888. The translator wanted 
the work to be undoubtedly a forgery, containing much that Lao-tze 
said, but more that he did not. His canons of criticism are as follows- 



124 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

he considers as gibberish, rigmarole or nonsense all passages that he 
cannot understand, and as forgeries all those which in a non-exhaustive 
enquiry he has not found quoted in later authors of the following 
centuries. He brought on his work two crushing rejoinders of Dr. John 
Chalmers, ihid. vol. XIV, p. 323 sq. and of Prof. James Legge, Ibid. 
vol. XVI, p. 196 sq., as well as another one in several articles of Dr. 
J. Edkins, and an interesting one of Prof. G. v. d. Gabelentz, ihid. vol. 
XIV, XVI, XVII, and others. 

504) Notably by Pat. J. F. Foucquet (1723) mss. (Cf. H. Cordier, 
Bibliot. Sinic. col. 520) ; Stan. Julien, 1842 ; J. Chalmers, 1868 ; T. 
W. Watters, 18? : Rheinhold von Planckner, 1870 ; Victor von 
Strauss, 1870; H. Balfour, 1885; H.A.Giles, 1886-1888; Ch.de 
Harlez, 1891 ; L. de Rosny, 1892; J. Legge, 1892. A latin trans- 
lation mss. made in China, given by P. de Grammont to Mr. M. 
Eapper who presented it to the Royal Society in 1788, is now in the 
India Office. (Cf, J. Legge, Texts of Taoism, I, xii). 

505) This is the judgment passed by Prof. G. v. d. Gabelentz, ibid. vol. 
XVII, at the occasion of Mr. H. A. Giles' work. 

506) But whether (the account is) true or false, he is said to have first 
seen the light in the year 604 b.c. at the village of Kiuh-jen, or ' Op- 

, pressed benevolence,' in the parish of Li ox 'Cruelty,' in the district 
>«^of K'u or -Bitterness,' in the state of Ts'u or 'Suffering.' R.K. Dou- 
glass, Confucianism and Taois?n, 1879, p. 175. — The concatenation of 
the meanings is highly suggestive of a fabulous statement, inasmuch as 
divergences of opinion have existed on the identification of the above 
named localities, because they could not be found exactly. There were 
also differences of spelling in the names. Cf. the various comments 
added to the text of Szema Tsien, edit, of the T'ang dynasty (Kiv. 62, 
f. 1); the Kiva ti tchi, a geographical work of the third cent., the Shen 
sien tchuen of the fourth century, &c. In the third century, the dwel- 
ling and temple of Lao Tan were shown at Ku yang hien in Poh tchoii 
(Ngan-hwei). Afterwards under the Tsin dynasty (IVth cent.,) they 
were shown as at present near Kwei-teh fu (Honan). The simple fact, 
which no assimilation can disguise, is that the village of Kiuh jen, or the 
Li, or the district of Kn. referred to in the above statement, were and 
are still unknown in positive geography. 

507) Su2Jra, §§ 122 and 65. 

508) Cf. Shway Yoe, The Burman, 1892, vol. I., p. 57;sq. — The custom 
of piercing and lengthening the ears was extensive in the South. In 
111 B.c when Southern China was organised by the Han, the island of 
Hainan formed the district of Tati-erh (Bas. 510-8337) i.e. of the 'ears 
falling on shoulders,' and part of that of Tchu yai, or Red Cliffs. (Cf. 
She Id, Kiv 113, f. 9.) — Let us remark however that Wen, Duke of 
Tsin (B.C. 696-628) was called Tchung erh (Bas. 11373-8337) like 
Lao Tan. 

509) The taking a name from a tree near which one stands, is not a Chi- 
nese but a Himalayan custom. — Li, (Bas. 4076) thr name in question 
is said by the Fung su fung of the Ilnd cent. a.d. to be the name of the 
descendants of Peh Yang, a name given also to Lao Tan, but it does 
not mention any one before bearing that surname. A feeble attempt 
was made after the Sung dynasty, in the Peh Kla sing, to create an 



CHINESE Civilisation. 125 

ancestry to the surname, by an assimilation with another surname, Li 
(Bas. 5936) of the Yn dynasty, otherwise unsupported. It is now a 
regular surname in China. It is also that of one of the Hua Miao, ab- 
original tribes of Kwei-tchcu, as stated in G. Playfair, The Miaotze 
of Ktveichou, No. 8, Prof. R.K. Douglas, The Academy, April 25, 
1885, thinks that the surname of Lao Tan was connected with the latter. 

510) Reported in Tchwaiig tze, Kiv. XIV., par. 6; also XIII., 6. 

511) She Ki, Kiv. 63, f. 2r. 

512) This document is older than the biography written by Ko-hung 
about 350 a.d.^ in his She7i sieji tchuen, and which has been translated 
by Stan. Julien, Le lirre de la Voie et de la Vertu, 1852, p. xxii-xxxii. 

513) The historical dates of Lao Tan are not ascertained. We have al- 
ready stated that Szema Tsien knew nothing of his years of birth and 
death. Tchwang tze (Kiv. XIV,, par. 5) states that Confucius knew 
nothing of the Tao, until his 51st year, when he called on Lao Tan at 
P'ei (a place which has not been identified, although it was the name of 
a region near Su-tchou, Kiang-su, which cannot be the same). This 
would be in 501 or 500 B.C., and Lao Tan should have been then 104 
years old, which is most probably too much, if there is any truth in the 
alleged date of 604 B.C., given as that of his birth by some of his late 
biographers. 

514) Cf. supra, note 469. — Also, D'Eckstein, Journal Asiatigue, XIV., 
Sept., Oct., 1842. — Rev. J. Faber's article on Taoism in China Review, 
vol. XIII., deals also wiht the question. 

515) Cf. supra, end of note 469. — The Sanskrit tad and svad corres- 
pond pretty well to the Chinese tzet and hi (vi), but the third k am a, 
Skr., and mi. Chin,, differ more widely as to their sense. In Skr. it is 
L ove, and in Chinese it is s ubtl e. Was this difference that of a 
special Hindu school with which Lao Tan was acquainted? Prof. Leon 
de Rosny, in his recent work, Le Taoisme, 1892, introd., has remarked 
that the absence of the great idea of love in Lao-tze's system was the 
greatest shortcoming of his philosophy. 

* * * 
140. Lao Tan makes in his work frequent quotations from sources 
which he does not indicate with precision^^^; although some of these quota- 
tions were not unknown to writers of the following century, it is not 
possible save in one case to trace them to their sources, and it is probable 
that for these writers the sources was the teachings of Lao-Tan himself 
who had derived them from his acquaintance with Hindu thoughts and 
views. In his capacity of Librarian at Loh-Yang, he had access to all 
the relics of the past which were treasured there, includng many remains and 
fragments handed down from remote ages and the first introduction of the 
Chaldeo-Elamite culture. But he did not share the Chinese worship for 
Antiquity, and his great contempt for all the ancient traditions is shown 
by his statement to Confucius. With regards to Cosmogony, the notion 
of the Yn and Yang, the female and male activity of nature, which existed 



126 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

in the Archives could not satisfy him, since the concept of love had no 
place in his Ontjlogy. ITow another notion which he found most cer- 
tainly there agreed with his views, and he gave it a standing in his work 
without quoting his source, which however, we know, was some docu- 
ment attributed to Hwaag-ti, from where Lieh-tze has himself quoted it 
in his teachings during the following century. 

141. As it is one of the most remarkable relics of foreign and remote 
'p. .^W I 6^/ 1*^ Antiquity in Ancient Chinese literature, ^i? let us quote it verbatim, with 

a word for word translation : 

The Book of Hwang-Ti says^^^: 

1. Kuh s hen p uh s e 
(The) deep's spirit not dies ; 

2. S h e we I hi u e n p'' in 

It is called (the) dark-abyss's female. 

3. Hi u en p' in tchi men 

(The) dark-abyss female-ox's door, 

4. S he we i T^ ien ti t chi ken 

It is called (he Heaven (and) Earth's root ; 

5. Mie nmienjohts^uen 
Perpetually as if preserved 

6. Tung tchi pu hi eh 

Its activity is not restrained. 

We read it correctly as follows : "The spirit of the deep dies not ; — 
d It is called the Animal-mother of the dark-abyss. — The door of the An- 
imal-mother of the dark-abyss. — It is called the Root of Heaven and 
Earth ; — As if it was perpetually preserved, — Its activity is not re- 
strained," 

142. Some remarks are required on this noteworthy fragment of Cos- 
mogony. The ' spirit of the deep ' is the rendering of Kuh shen, i.e. the 
spirit of the Kuh, which Kuh materially means ' a valley ' but which the 
sequence of the text requires to take in a wider sense such as an earthly 
deep or abyss. The two following words imply its eternal character 
which is furthermore described by the two last verses. Hiiien p%n of the 
second line has been variously rendered, viz. femelle mysterieuse (Julien), 
female mystery (Legge), generatrice de 1' abime infini (De Harlez), Hidden 

A mother (Chalmers), Abyss mother (Eitel);5i9 the third and fifth of these 
renderings show that their authors have understood the cosmogonic 
character of the text. The word pHn has however a peculiar significance 
which is an important feature of the notions here expressed ; it is ideo- 
graphically an ox-female and it has become a generic term for the 
female of animals. Its acceptation of m o t h e r in the present case is 




CHINESE CIVILISATrON. 127 

pointed out by the twenty-fifth chapter of the same work, where the same 
concept is described as the mother of the Universe.^^o 

The euphemism of the third verse is clear enough not to require any 
comment, and as explained by the words following is that from where 
sprung heaven and earth ; the figure of speech is befitting to the general 
standpoint taken by Lao Tan. 

143. It is needless to argue on the cosmogonic and un-Chinese charac- 
ter of this fragment; it is glaring to the eyes of any one engaged in anti- 
quarian researches. It is not connected with any Indian views on cosmo- 
gony (where the dual element, male and female, by the incitement of love 
(^Karma) are always prominent) and this is rather striking, should we 
consider how much Lao Tan was indebted to Hindu thought under seve- 
ral other respects. Moreover, it does not belong either to Assyro-Baby- 
lonian cosmogonies of later date, — where also the male and female powers 
are the chief actors, ^^^ — which might have been introduced by the sea -tra- 
ders of the Indian Ocean. But curiously enoiigh it is much older than 
that period. It is a strikingly exact description of a Babylonian cosmo- 
gonic conception of remote Antiquity, which has no similar anywhere else, 
and which therefore cannot be mistaken for anything else. 

144. In this old Babylonian cosmogony, "the mother that has begotten 
heaven and earth" is Zikuv,^^^ (the spirit of the immanent), 523 
described as the Apsu, the primordial abyss or deep, out of which both 
earth and heaven were produced. She was ''the great mother." and in the 
era of totemism, in early times, was known as "the pure heifer."524 ^j, 
kuv, and Zigaruv or Zikui-a, are also the names of Gurrd, when regarded 
as the whole body of chaos, out of which the heaven and the earth were 
formed ;525 and it is possible that Zt-Icum was originally considered also as 
the spirit of the earth alone,526 and therefore as the spirit of a primordial 
terrestial deep, 5^'' or simply the spirit of the hollo w.^^s 

145. The identity is so close between this cosmogonic conception and that 
of the fragment inserted in his work by Lao Tan, that we have no choice in 
the explanation it forces upon us. In the archives of Tchou, he had found 
a work or a collection of fragments of olden times, concerning the teach- 
ings of Yu Nai Hwang ti, leader of the Bak families in China, and the 
Babylonian notions which he had received in the West. This collection 
was known as the Book of Hwang-ti, as stated by Lieh-tze when quoting 
the same fragment. It is a new confirmation, as remarkable as unexpected, 
of the existence of such documents in Ancient China,529 which we have 
suspected all along this work, for many reasons explained therein. 



128 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

146. The sixth chapter is not the only part of the Tao teh King, which 
shows that Lao Tan had come across some fragments of Babylonian lore. 
In his twenty-fifth chapter, he has grafted upon a description of the sort, 
his conception of the Tao: "There was something undefined and complete, 
Before Heaven and Earth it existed.— It was still and formless! — Stand- 
ing by itself and undergoing no change, — Eeaching everywhere and not 
in danger! — It maybe regarded as the Mother of the Universe. — I do not 
know its name, — and I give it the designation of T a o." 

Let us substitute Tiawat, the primordial chaos, of the earliest Ba- 
bylonian cosmogonies, to T a o, and we could easily imagine that the above 
text is a direct translation from an ancient cuneiform text, instead of being 
a fragment inserted in Lao Tan's work. 

Notes 

516) Such for instance in the following passages: 2, 9; 7, 3; 8, 4; 12 ,6; 
34, 7; 57, 7; 58, 6; 73, 5; 77, 5; 78, 5; 79, 3, and others.— Stan. Ju- 
lien, Le Livre de la Vote et de la Vertu, p. 22, quoting the commen- 
tator T'u T'ao-kien of the Xlllth century, on the chap. VI, says: "On 
sait que Lao-tsen cite beaucoup de passages des livres appele's/ew tien." 
But he does not give any information on the latter. Dr. J. Legge, The 
Texts of Taoism, 1892, I., 2, quotes the same Chinese writer to the fol- 
lowing effect: Lao tze was accustomed to quote in his treatise, passages 
from earlier records, — as when lie refers to the remarks of 'some sage,' 
of 'some ancient,' of the sentence-makers,' and of 'some writer on war.' 
In all these cases he is clearly introducing the words of earlier wise men. 
— ^The fen tien in question were the san fen and the Wu tien which 
Confucius threw over, with the exception of two of the five tien (TFm 
tien) when he selected the documents which composed the Shu King. 
Cf. below, §150. 

517) It occurs in the Tao teh King, Kiv. 6, and in Lieh tze, I., lb. — 
The statement was so satisfactory to Lao Tan, that he enlarged it in 
his Kiv. 2 5. But it is Lieh-tze only who refers to the original work. 

518) Cf. the following translations: 1^ by Stan. Julien: "L'Esprit de la 
valle'e ne meurt pas; on I'appelle la femelie mysterieuse. — La porta de 
la femelie mysterieuse s'appelle la racine du ciel et de la terre. — II est 
eternel et semble exister (materiellement). — Si Ton en fait usage, on 
n'eprouve aucune fatigue." — Cf. Le Livre de la Voie, p 2i. — 2*' by Prof. 
J. Legge: "The valley spirit dies not, aye the same; — The female mys- 
tery thus do we name. — Its gate, from from which at first they issued 
forth, — Is called the root from which grew heaven and earth, — Long 
and unbroken does its power remain, — Used gently and without the 
touch of pain." Cf. The texts of Taoism, L, 51.— 3°) By Prof. Ch, de 
Harlez: L'esprit de I'immensit^ ne meurt point. — C'est lui que Ton ap- 
pelle la generatrice de I'abime infini. — Sa porte est appellee la racine du 
ciel et de la terre.— Elle subsiste eternellement, et les etres en usent 
sans jamais la fatiguer." Cf. Textes Taoistes, p. 292. — It is clear that 
in the first and second of these translations, the real object of tho state- 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 129 

tnent has not been clearly understood. Mr. H.A. Giles, Tfie Remains 
of Lao-Tce Re-translated, does not believe this chapter composed by 
Lao-tze; he does not attempt to translate it, and as he has no idea 
what it means, he declares it a self-evident forgery! It was diflficult for 
this translator to give a greater proof of his incompetency in ancient 
matters. 

519) In his Chinese dUtionary, s.v. p'in. 

520) see below, §138. 

521) Francois Lenormant, Orignes de Vhlstoire, vol. I, pp. 493-570 
has reproduced numerous versions of this later cosmogony, where the 
notion of the animal mother lias disappeared. 

522) W.A.I, II. 48. 26; 50. 27.— A.H. Sayce, Eel. Anc. Bab. p. 375. u.. 
remarks that Zikurn, Zi-garum, Zi-kura, are all compounds of Zi, 
'a spirit,' and are explained by Zi{E)kura, 'the spirit of the lower 
firmament.' 

523) Cf. Knm = Kuv with Ktiuma = Kiiuva, rest, peace, in F. Lenor- 
mant, Etudes Accadiennes. III., 142, 17; E. Chossat, Repertoire Sv- 
merien, p. 116. 

524) Cf. -A. H. Sayce, -Bel. Anc, Bab. p. 375. — The complex ideogram 
Brunn. 4991, read ;)rtrw, cow, and written ideographic-ally (anshu-mul) 
beast -J-trebly-divine or starry, is perhaps a surviving embodiment of 
these views. Or is it a survival of tlie notions introduced by the ma- 
ritime civilisers and the " snow-white hornless cows" spoken of in the 
fabulous reports of South Arabia by Agatharcides {De Rubra Mart, 
Oxon., 1698, p. 64). 

525) W.A.I. II., 48, 26, 27.— A.H. Sayce. O.C., p. 2i>2.— Cf. also F. 
Hommel, Die semitischen V(dker, p. 38. 

526) A. H. Sayce, 0. C, p. ;i75. 

527) Perhaps it was neither terrestriul nor oceanic, — and thus be a clear 
vestige of the early time when the abyss was not yet looked upon as 
watery. The remark is import .nt because it stamps the remote date of 
the notion embodied in the document. 

528) Cf. also P. Jensen, Die Kosmologie der Babylonier, p. 5, 491. 

529) In my paper On the Oldest Book of the Chinese, 1883, I expressed 
the opinion, then looked upon as rather bold, that the Bak families had 
been acquainted with lexicographic documents like the so-called sylla- 
baries, and I am now more than ever of the same opinion, which is at 
present already supported by many facts. Cf . supra, ch. IV., sect, b, §24. 

530) Stan. Julien, Le Livre de la Voie, p. 91, translates: ne periclite 
point; J. Lcgge, Taoist texts, 1., p. 67, translates: in no danger (of 
being exhausted). 1 he text says: erh puh tai, and not is-in-danger. 

531) Julien: 'V Univers;' Legge: 'all things;' the text: fien. hia, ben- 
eath of heaven. 

532) Cf. A. H. Sayce, Rel. Anc. Bab., p. 370-374. 



[Chaf. Vrr. Paut IL~Fourth Period : 670-481 b.c] 

Sect, d) Foreign influence in the North West. Barbarous customs. 

147. In the Nortli-west the influence from the outside was the reverse- 
of being beneficial or progressive. The region was properly at that time 
the west of the Chinese dumin'on, and it was occupied by the state of 
Than, mod. Ts'm, whose population was greatly composed of non-Chinese 
tribes, the Jungs, whom it gradually subdued and absorbed. Although 
recognized as an independent fief of the Middle Kingdom in 770, when 
the seat of the latter was forcibly removed eastwards, it did not howevei* 
take part in the concert of the other states previously to 645 e.g. ^33 ■yyg 
have already remarked that by its position it stopped the way to any in- 
tercourse on that side between the other states and the foreign lands of the 
We3t,534aiid the little intercommunication which existed had to be carried 
out by a more southerly route. s^^ The history states that from the time of 
Muh-wang's punitive expedition in the west, in 967 B.c.,^3^those who dwelt 
in the wild regions came no more to court, 5^^ and we have no evidence that 
the communications were renewed with the Ts'iN state. The statement 
is interesting to notice, in face of the changes which we shall record in the 
next paragraph, and the important movements which were taking place 
during that period in the East and South of the Chinese dominion. 

148. The innovations introduced in Ts'in denote barbarity and no im- 
provement nor enlightenment. Its princes established new worships, such 
as that of the Regents of the points of space^^^ and others. In 756, Ts'in 
Wen Kung, baring discovered on a hill a large stone shaped like a bird» 
instituted a regular worship to it, and its spirit was alleged to come from 



r 



132 ORIGIN OF THE EA.R^Y 

time to time.^^^ Teh Kung in his second j'^ear, i.e. in 676 B.C., offeied 
for the first time the sacrifice fiiJt, i.e., the body of a dog torn asun- 
der at tlie four gates of tlie town to avert the calamity of worms. 5'^ All 
these matters were of little importance. The worst innovations have yet 
to be noticed. In 746 the barbarous punishment of destroying 
the relatives of criminals was resorted to for the first time.^^^ Also 
the practice of human sacrifices, of which the two first notable in- 
stances occurred in 678 and 621 B.C., when 66 and 177 persons follow- 
ed {t-ning) their prince to the grave, ^^ have been severally mention- 
ed in European literature. 5'3 This was obviously a satisfaction given 
to the Tartar element of the population, probably supported by a new 
influx of the same race. The next instance in the same country was that 
of the funerals of She Huang Ti, the founder of the Chinese Empire, when 
ii large number of persons were buried with him in 210 b.c.s'^* 

149. The question arises to know if these human sacrifices were not 
simply a revival, in favourable surroundings, of an ancient practice which 
had become obsolete in the more civilized parts of the Chinese dominion, 
instead of being an innovation unheard of before. And the custom of 
placing puppets in the graves, which existed in tlie time of Confucius, and 
IS at present still followed, ^'^^ has been put forward as proof that sucli 
sacrifices existed amongst the most ancient Chinese. s^^ The matter re- 
quires a more extensive inquiry than has hitherto been made, and the fresh 
•evidence we shall adduce here placing the question on a different footing, 
disproves this premature conclusion. Although the Chinese chiefs 
and officials have never been over-scrupulous about the life of others, even 
for sacrificial purposes, let us remember, that there is no evidence what- 
ever that they had ever practised human sacrifices previously to the events 
and circumstances which concern us here. 5^7 Notwithstanding their per- 
manent influence on some superstitions and practices, the human sacrifices in 
China were only temporary, and under foreign influences of a passing 
character. 

150. These human sacrifices belonged to two classes Avhieh must be 
elearly distinguished one from the other : I'' the sacrifices by self-devotion 
or supposed self-devotion of living persons to the departed ; and 2'^ the 
slaughter or burning of unwilling persons for sacrificial purposes. 

The first class comprehends s u tt is m, and the siilri. 

161. Self-sacrifices of the widows^i^ is a widely spread practice,5^3 and 
as they result from the natural feeling of devotion of the derelict towards 
lier departed lord, it may have arisen anywhere without requiring any im- 



CHINESE CIVILISATION, 133 

pulse from the outside, it is needless therefore to trace the Chinese sut- 
tism to its source, although it does not seem to have begun before Indian 
influence was strongly felt in the land. Suttism has never been a regular 
institution in China, and until 1729, when it was discountenanced by au 
Imperial edict, 5 'O it was limited to personal convenience and isolated cases, 
which nevertheless had become too frequent about that date, because of 
the honour which was paid to them . 

152. The -S'i^rt practice was another affair. ^''^ It began in 678 B.C. in the 
Avest state of Ts'in, as we have already seen § 148, undoubtedly under 
Tartar influence. The great instance of 62i, was the prelude to its ex- 
tension in others of the Chinese states. The next occasion recorded in 
liistory is that of 589, at the burial of the Duke Wen of Sung (HonanE.') 
when the Siun practice was followed for the first time there ;3''2 such is 
the precise statement of Tso Kiu-ming. Afterwards we find an instance 
in 581 in Ts'in, when a servant of the defunct Duke Nou was buried 
alive with his master. s-^ 3 Then at Su-tchou (Kiangsu) in the state of 
Wu, about 500 B.C., the Prince Ho-lii (514-496 b.c.) having lost a fav- 
ourite daughter, ran undescribed number of men and women were buried 
alive with her; but the act was reprobated by his subjects. ^^t There is 
also the would-be instance amongst private people which was disproved by 
Tze K'ang, a disciple of Confucius, who said that "to bury living persons 
in the grave of the dead (siiln) is contrary to the rules of propriety. "^^5 
However the siiui was a well known and rather extensively practised cus- 
tom in the fourth century B.C., as shown by the words of Tchwang tze, 
who was writing about 379-330 B.c.^ss The last instance of notoriety 
was that of the funeral of She Hwang Ti in 210 b.c when it was com- 
pulsory. The practice had changed in character, and seems not to have 
been followed again by the Cliinese. Such were the beginning and end of a 
barbarous influence in China,^^? at a time when the whole country was, to 
some extent, anxious to adopt any novelty. It has left some survivals, 
as we shall now see.^-^^ 

153. To imitate the new and peculiar custom of the Sii'm of the lead- 
ing state, — such was the position of Ts'in at the death of Duke Muh, the 
fourth of the five Pa, in G21— was not within the reach of every one. We 
may easily assume that the required self-willing victims, by devotion, 
thirst of fame, or for a consideration, could be only the exception, and 
never the rule. Moreover, the practice was objectionable to the human feel- 
ing of the people at large, and was not sanctioned by the traditional rites. 
An ingenious device was resorted to. There was an old custom — a widely 



134 ORIGIK OF THE EARLY 

spread one^^^ — of placing in the tomb mock implements, which they called 
miny-li, i.e. liglit objects,'''*' imitations in bamboo, clay, or cloth of 
things which might be useful to the departed ; and also that of represent- 
ing the defunct at the funerals by a straw effigy '^^ (tsao-Ung).^^^ These 
led undoiibtedly those who could not tlirough impecuniosity, human feel- 
ing or otherwise practice the siiin custom, to substitute for living persons, 
yung, or little wooden figures. ^^^^ We can thus understand how it hap- 
pened that Confucius could praise the first, and reprobate the second, as 
there was a danger of its leading to taking living men.^*"* The departed 
is still represented at his own funeral, ^''^ and little human figures are 
placed in the coffin at the feet of the deceased in some parts of the land. 5^5 
The substitution of puppets for human victims has taken place in several 
countries'^'''' and notably in Japan, '^''^ 

154. The second class of human sacrifices in China presents only a few 
and occasional records, since the custom of slaughtering or burning un- 
willing persons as offerings was not congenial with them. They did do so 
only under another foreign influence, shown by the first instance here 
reported. In 641 b.c. the Duke of Sung, (the state where we have noticed 
so strong an influence from the foreigners of Lang-ga and Tsih-moh) 

4 made duke Wen of Tchu sacrifice the viscount of Tseng at the altar on 
the bank of the Suy, wishing to draW. to him the Easteru barbarians {yuh 
y $lmh Tinig y)-^^^ Now as these eastern barbarians were the foreigners 
in question, the case of their influence is clearly established. The name of 
the deity to whom the sacrifice was made is not mentioned, but we may 
remark that it was on the bank of a river, and this peculiarity makes it 
similar to the human sacrifices at Yeh which we have noticed previous- 
ly, ^^'^ and were due to the same influence. In 531, another human sacri- 

y^. fice is reported, by the Prince of Ts'u on mount Kang, but there is not 
perhaps in it any connection with the other, '^^^ although it was also a religi- 
ous sacrifice.^''^ Therefore all that we had to say here on theisecond class of 
human sacrifices might have been placed in our previous sect, b of this 
fourth period ; but the affinity of the subject required it to be dealt with 
here. 

Notes 

533) Its first appearance during the Tchun tsiu period was in that year, 
Cf. Tso ichiten, Hi Kung, Ann. XV. 

534) Suprc, ch. VI. /. div. 4, par. 92. 

535) Siijird, ch. VI., sect, e, div. 1, par. 52. 

536) It was not the same as that already noticed (supra, ch. VI., sect, b^ 



CHINESE CIVIMSATIOX. 135 

^ ;>9, and note 105), ".vliich dccurred in 98;") B.C. 

5;3t) Kang kien // tchi lull. — Medlmrst, SItoo king, p. 385. 

5:38) In 7G'J tlie Prince of Ts'in established a raised altar {tclii) for sacri- 
fices to the White Ti, the Uei^ent of the West quarter (with ^^llonl the 
early Ruler Shao Hao had been identitied) as a set-otT against the 
Shang Ti worship of the King of Tc hou. This led to the worship of the 
Five Tis as Regents of tlie five points of space. In G7'2, a similar altar 
was raised to the Tsuig Ti, the Green-blue Regent (identified with 
Tai Hao or Fuh-hi) At the beginning of tlie Han dynasty four Tis of 
the four quarters only were worshipped as yet, and the series of five 
was completed bv Han Kao tsu in 201 b.c. — Cf. Szenia Tsien, Kiv. 
XIV ; and Kiv. XXVIII., ff. 3. 5, 17,— Tchiih shu Ki nien, s. d. 

530) It was called the Jewel of Teh' en {Tch'en pau) because it had 
been discovered on the north side of the Tch'en tsang (in Pao ki hien, 
pret. of Fung tsiang in Shensi. — Cf. Szema Ts'ien, She Ki, Kir. 28^ 
f. 4-4r. 

540) Shi Ki. Kiv. 28, f. 5. 

541) Tchiih shu Ki men. Tchou Ping wang, ann. 25. — She Ki, Kiv. V., 
f. 6. 

542) She Ki, Kiv. V,. f 7r and 26.- Tso tchuen, 6 : VII.. 2.— Shi King, 
part I., Bk. XI., Ode Hwang Niao. 

553) Notiibly by W.F. Mayers, On the StOiie figures at Chinese tombs- 
and the offering of living sacrifices, p, 13, 14 : J.N. Ch. Br. R.A.S., 
1878. XII., 1-18. 

544) She Ki, Kiv. VI., f. 28. — W.F. Mayers, On the Stone figures, \.c. 

545) Cf. below § 153 and notes 560, 5G4, 568. 

54G) J.J.]\r. de Groot, Les Fetes Annuelles d Emoul, p. 647. The author 
uses wrongly the term suttism for all human sacrifices at funerals 
(p. 645), while the term can refer only to the self-sacrifice of the widows. 
Cf. Yule-Burnell, Glossary of Anglo-Indian terms, p. GGG-671, s.v.. 
S Httee).—A. Reville, La Religion Chinoise, 1889, p. .i00-2i2. The 
latter scholar, working only second hand, cannot be referred to as an au- 
thority on tlie matter, except for hi.s own views, which have been under 
several respects the object of a damaging rejoinder by Prof. C. de 
Harlez in his paper on La Religion en Chine, 1889. noticed supra,. 
note 101. The facts and the texts side with the learned Orientalist of 
Louvain. 

547) It has been rightly remarked that nothing in all that we know of the 
ancient state religion of the Chinese has ever countenanced human sac- 
rifices. Cf W. Williams, The Middle Kingdom, II., 192, and Ue Groot. 
Les Fetes, p. 2 81, 785. 

548) Suttism is a Brahmanical rite; its Sanskrit name is saha-gamana, 
or keeping company. It was known by the Greek writers since 317 B.C., 
as an Indian practice (Diod. Sic, XlX., 33-34). Suttee is properly 
the Skr. sati, a good woman, a good wife. Cf. Yule-Burnell, Gloss- 
ary, I.e. 

519) Cf. Herbert Spencer, Principles of Sociology, ch. xiv., par. 104. — 
De Groot, Les fetes, p. 557-558, and Yule's Glossary, p. 667. 

550 J Translated in Self-immolation in China : Notes and Queries of 
China and Japan, vol. II., 1863, p. 3-4 ; partly reproduced in De Groot, 
Les Fetes, p. 559-5e0. 

551) Simi (Bas. 4 98) means 'to bury the (self-willing) living with the 



136 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

dead ; but we may be sure that compulsion and force were often resorted 

to, as in the cases of c. 500 and 210 b.c. 
f»52) The text says : she ipnig siin. Cf. 7'so tcJiuen, 8, IT, 5. 
55'^) Ibid. 8, X. 5. — 1'here is a story there, tliat the servant ha'l dreamed 

that he carried his master on his back to lieaven, 
55Ji) IFa i/iceh tchwi ts/'u. — Viiun Kicn lai han, Kiv. 181, f. 5 ; W.F. 

Mayors, O/i the Stone p't/nres, ]i. 15. 

555) Lt Ki, T'an Kun,?,"2" : I f. 15. 

556) "Small men for the sake of gain have sacrificed (sii'oi) their persons; 
scholars for the sake of fame iiave done so ; great officers for the sake 
of their families ; and sagely men for the sake of the kingdom. These 
several classes, with different occupations, and different reputations, 
have agreed in doing injury to tlieir nature, and sacrificing their persons." 
Cf. Tchwang tze, Bk. VIII., Pt. II., sect. I., par. 4; Sacred Books of 
the East, XXXIX., 272-3. — The term siiin is repeated in each case. 

557) We must make an exception for the Tartar families who have ruled 
over part or the whole of China, and may have followed a custom con- 
genial to them, when not softened as yet by Chinese influence. Even 
the present dynasty of Mandshu Tartars followed it at the beginning ; 
the only case was that of Shi Tsu, the first Emperor, who had thirty 
persons killed on the grave of his Empress. His son, Shang Tsu, or 
K'ang hi, put an end to the custom. — Cf. also below, note 572. 

:)58) The present enquiry does not pretend to be exhaustive, and some 
more facts could be added, but they would not modify the aspect of the 
question as now stated. — In the T'ang shu, Kiv. 122, notice of the 
Eastern Kingdom of Women, 2\i7>g viu kicoh, also called Suvarna 
Gotra, "Golden family," situated in N". Tibet, it is stated that when 
the Sovereign is buried, several tens of jiersons followed the dead into 
the tomb. Cf. William Woodville Bockhill, The Land of the Lamas, 
1891, p. 310. 

550) Cf. Francois Ijenormant, Gazette des Beaux Arts, 1863, p. 1 I, 153. 

560) On the Miiig Ki, cf. the rituals : I li, XII., 8-16 ; trad. C. de 
Harlez, 1890, p. 298-305.— Z; A7 2 ; I : iii., 3 and 44 ; Sacred Books 
of the East, XXVII., p. 1 J 8, 172. They consisted of vessels, vases, 
lutes, pipes, bells, according to the statement of Confucius in the latter 
work (par. 3 cited). It will be remarked that there is no mention made 
here of human figures, chariots, &c., on which see below. The imita- 
tions of musical instruments rejirescnted the real instruments which were 
employed at the ceremonv according to the rites reported in the Tchou- 
//, Kiv. 22, 1. 39, 51; Kiv. 23, 1. 2" , 29, 45, 48, 57, (tr. Biot, vol. II., 
p. 40, 45, 51, 5 ', 61, 63, 68. — The statement of the Tw tchuen con- 
■cerning the funeral of the Duke of Sung, in 589, referred to in the text 
(^ 152), gives some interesting information on another custom. It says 
that the departed Duke was tlie first to whom they gave a great inter- 
ment, nsing mortar made of ashes of burnt frogs for the vault in the 
grave, with more than the usual number of carriages and horses {yh kiii 
ma). Some commentators want to see there the (earthen) carriages and 
( straw) horses, which it became customary at a certain tune to put in 
the grave. But there is no necessity of stretching the meaning of the text 
iis far as that, since we know by the Li Ki, T'an Kung, 2, II., 4, that the 
ritual number of carriages (carrying the offerings to be put into the 



CIIIXRSE CIVILISATION. 1^37 

grave) was seven for the ruler of a state, five fur a great officer, and 
■one for ]n*ivafe individuals. The text of tlie Chronicle refers to that 
undoubtedly. — Confucius does not refer to earthen carriages in speak- 
ing of the MiJig Ki\ and therefore we may assume that in his time, the 
custom was not yet accepted and current. It is however mentioned in 
tlie Li Ki, ibid. I., 45, as an ancient practice ; and it is so much like 
the regular Plioenician custom, that we may venture to suppose that it 
was introduced to the Cliinese by tlie foreign traders of Lang-ga and 
Tsih-Moh, (Cf. the figure of such earthen carriages found at Cyprus. 
in Perrot-Chipiez, Histoire de Vart antique, vol. III., fig. 145, 524, and 
the remarks on pp. 202, 212. 4G8, 58~', 713). — At present figures in 
paper and bandioo slips, of sed n i:hairs and coolies, horses, and e\^en 
boats are burnt at funerals for the use of the departed in the other 
world. Cf. J. Doolittle, Social life of the Chinese, ed. 1868, p. 131: 
De Groot, Les fetes a. Emouy, ])p. 432, 580, G55, 673 ; The Religious 
system, vol. I., p. 28, etc. — There was no sacrifice of horses amongst the 
ancient Chinese at funerals except for the Emperor, but it wasthe custom 
to send horses to take part in the funeral procession. — The horse was 
the first of the six s.icred victims, the five others being the ox, sheep, 
pig, dog, and hen. According to the Tchou-li, one was sacrificed and 
buried at the Emperors' funerals (Kiv. jxxii., 50, 59) ; but not at 
any others' funerals. A yellow horse was offered by the Emperor at 
the Sacrifices to the IMountains and Rivers of the Empire (Kiv. xlii., 
23). When in travelling, the Emperor happened to pass near a famous 
Mountain or River, the Great Prior in his name sacrificed a horse 
(Kiv. XXV., 5) Cf. also the L: 10, Kiv. xii., 17- 

561) In the Tchou li, ch., XXI., 46, the official in charge of the funerals 
(Tchung ;cn) notifies the approaching burial to the human figure (siang 
jen) placed on the Zit'aw-bird-ornamented-chariot. (Cf. trad., J .d. Biot, 
vol. IL, p. -3) and which was a tsao ling. 

562) According to Kia Kong yen of c. 700 a.d., a cel.'brated commenta- 
tor of the Tchou li, this cuftom dated from remote antiquity. — Lao Tan 
(ch. V.) Tchwang tze, and also Hwai-nan-tze menticm the grass-dogs, 
made of straw tied up in the shape of dogs, and used in praying for 
rain ; after the sacrifice, they were thrown aside and left uncared for, 
Cf. Stan. Julien, Le Livre de la Voie, p. 19 : J. Legge, 2'exts of Tao- 
ism, p. 50, On an ancient sacrifice of a dog, cf. supra, § 95, note 363 
and also § 148. 

563) We are told that the yung were made with a figure, two eyes, and a 
spring, having thus the appearance of living persons. Cf. Tai ping yil 
Ian, Kiv. 552, f. 3. (Comm. of the Li Id). 

564) Li Ki, 2 : If. 1, par. 45. This opinion of Confucius was not un- 
derstood before, because tliere M-as a confusion about the real purpose 
olt\\Qtsao ling, which confusion Kia Kong yen {supra ?i.562) has cleared 
off by his statement that the tsao-ling (single not several) was carrie.d 
at funerals. Cf. the conflicting views of Legge, Chinese Classics, II, 
9, n. 6 ; De Groot, Les fetes, p. 645 , Albert Reville, La Religion 
Chlnoise, p. 201, which would not have been put forth without it. 

5G5) Cf. Julius Doolittle, Social life of the Chinese, ch. VI. — I.J.M d. 

Groot, I'he Religious system of China, vol. I., 1892, p. 173, 85. 
566) Notably at Amoy. CI De Groot, Les Fetes, p. 646 ; The Rel^. 



13S ORIGIN OF THE EAKLY 

gious system of China, p. 2^, 93. 

567) C'f. Sal. Reinach, Philologie Classique, TI. 'l^.i. 

568 j Our information on the stibject is derived from the Ko-ji-ki or Re- 
cords of Ancient Matters (712 a.d.) and from the Ni-hon-gi, or Chro- 
nicles of Japan (720 a.d.). The exact date of the introduction of the 
Chinese practice of the Siiin is not known, but an important instance 
is quoted under the reign of Su-jin of the ancient custom of burying 
retainers up to their necks in the neibourhood of their lord's grave. 
Under his successor Sui niin (r. 200 a.d.), on the suggestion of Nomi 
no Sukune little clay figures were made as substitutes. Cf. Basil 
Hall Chamberlain, tr. of A'o-^7-/l/, pp. 174, 200 ; Ni-lion-gi in Satow's 
transl.. Trans. R.A.S., Japan, VIII., 3-9-380. Representations of 
these clay images {tsucM-nin-giyo) are given in Henry von Siebold, 
Notes on Japanese Archaiologji, pi. xii., and in E. Satow, Ancient se- 
pulchral ?nounds in KandzuL-e, in Trans, VII., 313 sq. ; B.H. Cham- 
berlain, Ko-ji-ki, p. xH. — For a verification of the ancient Japanese 
dates, cf. the excellent paper of W.G. Aston, Early Japanese history. 
Tr. A.S. Japan, XVI., 1888, p. 39-75. 

569) Tso tchuen, 6 : XIX., 5. — The native exegetes have striven the 
meaning once more here, and we find in Legge's translation: "to awe 
and draw to him the wild tribes of the Kast." Ch. CI. V. 277, which is 
not countenanced by the words of the text. 

570) Of. supra, par. 106. 

■^ 571 ) In 531, the viscount of Tsjj extinguished Ts^, and sacrificed the 
Marquis's eldest son Vn on mount Kaiig. Cf. Tso tchuen, 10: xi., 9. 
572) W.F. Mayers, in his paper On the Stone figures cd Chinese tombs. 
p. 16, has quoted from the Yun luh mao tch'ao of Tchao Yen-wei (c 
1175 A.D.) an instance of human sacrifice in 1131 by the Kin or Djur- 
tchen Tartars when besieging Tang t'u (mod. Tai ping fu) ; they drove 
their victims to the banks of the river, ripped open their bodies, and 
^,.^ tore out their hearts to offer them in sacrifice for a change of wind. 



Sect, e) Internal reaction. Confucianism. 
l-i7. We have seen thus far the Chinese community assailed, east 
south and west, by various influences, and the introduction of novelties 
in ideas, notions and superstitions, which it was but too ready to accept. 
The freedom enjoyed by the States since 770, [supra § 102), the develop- 
ment of writing (§ 100), and the spirit of competition which arose be- 
tween them and was the prelude of the period of civil wars which ensued, 
are largely responsible for the facility with which ideas hitherto strange 
to the Chinese mind were in some cases hailed with favour in some parts 
^ of the dominion. But when these Un-Chinese notions began to spread, 
when ministers of state were seen professing openly ivonderisin,^'^^ a. keeper 
of Ih*" Royal Archives teach Taoism,^'''^ and Princes of States adopt bar- 
barous practices, ^^^ a reaction of the Chinese natural character was un- 
avoidable. It came to effect in the last part of the sixth century, and 



CHINKSE CIVILISATION. 139 

was represented for tbe time in the teachings of Confucius to his friends 
and disciples. Full of the traditional spirit of respect to ancestors, rit- 
ualism and propriety, he sternly opposed all the novelties which from the 
east, south and west, and from pre-historic times, were invading the old 
domain of Chinese thought and tradition. 

15G. No new conception, no creation of his genius, can be found in the 
teachings of Confucius, ^''^ who claimed for himsei to be 'a transmitter 
and not a maker, believing in and loving the Ancients. '^''^ He was a 
Chinese amongst the Chinese, and professed with their short comings all 
that was best and most noble^^^ in the traditions of his country. He 
upheld the traditional respect for the good deeds of the Ancestors, but 
as a rationalist, and in a limited sense as a positivist,^^^ the subjects 
on which he did not speak, were — extraordinary things, feats of strength, 
disorder and spirits. sso jjg professed however respect to the spirits, 
mixed with a sort of fear, and he believed in Omens, ^^'^ He was a firm 
believer in Shang-ti, the Supreme God, as shown in several instan- 
ces, but he often preferred to speak of H-eaveii.^^^ He discount- 
enanced all that be could not clearly understand, and deprecated the 
teachings of Lao Tan,^^^ while on another occasion he declared that ' to 
go for strange doctrines is injurious indeed. '^^'^ "We have seen pre- 
viously that he condemned the recently introduced practice of human sac- 
rifices. ^^^ "With reference to Ancestral worship the Great pliilosopher of 
Lu has a firm hold on all his race, although his ethics, always were 
befitting more to the class than to the mass, because they do not give 
satisfaction to the emotional side of human nature, and they lack of a 
sanction drawn from a future life. Nowhere else has any man personi- 
fied his race to the same extent, and as a natural consequence exercised 
so permanent an mfluence, as Confucius on the Chinese nation. 

157. As a historian, Confucius has not deserved from posterity an 
unqualified gratitude. Numerous instances in the Spring and Autumn 
Annals, or Tchun tsiu of the state of Lu from 722 to 481 b.c.,^^^ his own 
acknowledged work, that by which he wanted the after generations to 
pronounce their judgment upon him,^^^ make the western student think 
very doubtfully of his merits and truthfulness. ^^^ His most recent edi- 
tor and translator in English has shown repeatedly that he has willingly 
ignored, concealed and misrepresented the truth in hundreds of cases. ^^^ 

158. There is no doubt that we are indebted to him for a mangled 
preservation of the Shu King which has come down to us still more di- 
lapidated, but which otherwise might have been entirely lost, betweea 



U8R4^ 



UNIVERSITY 




OF THF 



\ 



l-lO ORlGi;^ OF THE EAULY 

his time and the Fire of Literature in 213 r..c. Nothing has been fcund 
which throws any suspicion on tlie statement made on tlie matter by liis 
kinsman and descendant Kung Ngm Kwo!!,^^'' who re-edited the classics, 
circa l.")U B.C. " He (Kung-tze) examined and arranged the grand monu- 
ments and records, 5^^ deciding to commence with Yao and Shun, and to 
comedown to the times of Tchou. When there was perplexity and confusion, 
he mowed them. Expressions frothy and unallowable he cut away. What 
embraced great principles he retained and developed. What were more 
minute and yet of importance he carefully selected. Of those deserving 
to be handed down to after ages, and to supply permanent lessons, he 
made in all one hundred books, consisting of Canons, Counsels, Instruc- 
tions, Announcements, Speeches and Charges. ^^-" One third of these 
documents have been lost since Confucius' time, but they have never been 
intended to form a continuous Record. It was not a history of Ciiina 
which he compiled, but a collection of texts countenancing his views. "Any 
\/ how besides later suppressions he has deliberately left aside and ignored 
any thing from old traditions, such as those which were preserved in the 
San fen or 'Three eminences' concerning Fuh-hi, Shen-nung and Hwang- 
ti, and in the Wu Tien or ' Five causes,' any thing concerning yiiao 
Hao, Tchwen Hiuh and Kao-sin, keeping only extracts from those of 
Yao and Shun."^^^ This method has deprived us of many a valuable 
tradition which in their capacity of state documents and mementos would 
have permitted to check the exuberancy or supply the insufficiency of the 
accounts which have been transmitted to posterity from irregular sources. 

159. Besides the mowing, cutting away, and developing processes of 
editorship, the pruning pencil of the sage had recourse to another means 
to instil his views ; this consisted in changing a word for another, or in 
the alteration of an ideogram by the additiv-n or change of one of its 
component parts, ^^^ a process impossible except with an ideographic 
writing like that of the Chinese. 5^5 

160, With reference to the Western foreigners, founders of the Chinese 
civilization, let us understand the position assumed by Confucius. His 
almost complete silence towards them can be explained as the natural 
feeling of a Chinese among the Chinese, such as he was, and thus would 
confirm our discoveries about their foreign origin. The traditions of the 
Shang Dynasty were preserved in the State of Sung (Cap. Shang-Kiu, 
HonanE.).596 TJiose of the Hia dynasty were preserved in the principal- 
ity of in which, established at first in Kai-fung fu (Honan), had been 
removed to the East, and in 616 B.C., had its centre at Yuen-hng (in 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 141 

modern clepartniont of Tsitig-tchoa, C. Shangtung).597 Confucius com- 
plained of the insufficiency of their records of the two dynasties just 
named. ^^^ He had thereftn-e studied them. We are told that when ihe 
TcHou dynasty was founded, the traditions of Yao were preserved ia 
Ki-tchou (i.e. Tchihli), and those of Huang-ti amongst the TchuJi, i.e. 
the priests ! 599 Those of Sliao-Hao were in K/ii (S. E. Shantung), while 
those of Shun were in Tchen (S. E. Honan).'^'^'^ Confucius may not have 
had access to all of them, although we know that he was not unacquain- 
ted with some of them,^°i and therefore his silence was voluntary. 

161. Hwang-ti and his son Shao-Hao were foreigners, born outside of 
China ; their immediate successors Tchuen-hiuli, Kao-yang and Ti Kao- 
Sin were yet too much of strangers; Yao was mcn'e of a Chinese, but he 
was still too clcisely connected with his foreign forefathers.'''^^ Such was 
not the case with Shun, who was a descendant of native princes, ^•'^ and 
his association in the government by Yaj has placed the latter on a diff- 
erent fo 'ting than his predecessor in the eyes of the patriotic Chinese. 
Hence it has happened that Yao and Shun have almost always been spo- 
ken of together. And it is a fact that the really Chinese history can 
hardly be said to begin before them. As to the myths and legends which 
Huang-ti and his Bak families had brought from the West, they were no 
part of the Chinese heirlooms, concerning as they did foreign folklore and 
traditions, or the past history of the Baks themselves. The consideration 
of these facts ought to justify the silence of the great philosopher of Lu, 
towards the myths, legends, and traditions anterior to the age of Yao and 
Shun, which were found in the ancient literature. 

162. The objections of Confucius to all that was unclear to his mind, 
or unsatisfactory to the sternness of his doctrines, and to all recits tinged 
with fables and wonderism, has thrown uselessly a discredit on ancient 
fragments of early ages. These early documents, which as natural in the 
case, could be but mixed up with stories of extraordinary feats and events, 
have not received the care and attention which would have secured for 
several centuries, at least to some extent, their safety and transmission 
to after ages. 

Such of these early statements as have come down to us, have been 
preserved by writers independent of Confucianism, and by Taoist writers 
who instead of shortening and softening them have on the contrary 
embellished and enlarged them by the addition of their own wonders and 
conceptions. They have not so much edited them as distinct works, 
than quoted from them, and inserted fragments in their own elucubra- 



l42 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

tions. And so it lias come to pass that for many a statement concern- 
ing remote antiquity, it is only in the Non-Confucian ist authors than 
we can find them. These circumstances are extremely important for all 
researches on Chinese origins and must be taken into account by western 
scholars, as they explain the exaggerated views of remoteness or modern- 
ness in Antiquity entertained by some Sinologists according to their 
leaning on Non-Confucianist or on Confucianist documents, while the 
truth which is neither on one side nor the other, is between the two. The 
first section of our next part will concern the formation of Taoszeism. 



Notes 

573) Cf. supra, § lOS. 

574) Cf. supra, § 126. 

575) Cf. supra, §§ IOG, U4. 

576) B. 551—0.471) b.c. 

577) Lun ijH, 7, I. 

578) 'Not do to others as j'ou would not wish done to yourself.' Lun yii, 
12, II. 

579) This side of his character is upheld by P. Laffitte, Considerations 
generates sur la civilisation Chinoise, 1861. 

580) Lun i/ii, 7, XX. — Cf. also, 13, III, 4 : 'A superior man, in re- 
gard to what he dues not know, shows a cautions reserve.' 

581) Cf. Tchmiff yung, xvi, 1, 2, 4.— Cf. Lun yii, G, XX : ' While re- 
specting the spirits {^Kwei shi?i), to keep also from them, may be 
called wisdom. 

583) Cf. specia'Jly I'chung yung, xix. 6 ; Ta-hioh, x, 5. — C. de Harlez 
Le Religions de la Chine, p. 160-162. — D'Hervey-Saint-Denys, Me- 
moires sur les doctrines religeiises de Confucius et de I'ecole des let- 
tre's, p. 22 (Mem. Acad. Inscript., torn, xxxii, 1887). — And J. Legge, 
Chinese Classics, vol, I, introd., p. 99. 

683) Tchu'ang tze, xiv, 6. — It seems however that Confucius derived 
some idea from his meeting with Lao Tan. Cf. the Tchung yung, xvi, 
2, with the / hi loei of chap, xiv, of the Tao ieh king. 

584) Lun yu, 2, xvi. 

585) Supra, § 145.— On Confucius and his doctrines, between other 
works. Cf. J. Legge, Chinese Classics I, introd. p. 12-113. — E. 
Faber, Lehrbegriff der Confucius, 1872. — Samuel Johnson. Oriental 
Religions : China, Boston, 1881, p. 571-63;^>. — R. K. Douglas, Con- 
fucianism and I'aolsm, l^l'o, p. 25-153. — Martin Hang, Confucius, 
der Weise China's, Berlin, 1880. — Ch. de Harlez, Les Religions de la 
Chine, Leipzig, 1891, p. 155-167, — Also, J. Legge, Confucius' life 
and teachings, 6th edit. 1887. -J. H. Plath, Confucius und Seine 
schiiler, l'?67. 

586) It consists simply of a dry ephemiridis of facts or incidents, with- 
out a single practical observation. Tiie sole peculiarity consists in the 
occasional selection of an ideogram instead of another, in order to show 
in a subrepstitious way the opinion of the writer on the recorded 
event. — Cf., for instance, T. de L., The Oldest Book of the Chinese, p. 



CHINESE ClVlLJijATlON. 143 

22. — Howevor diffionlt it may be for ns to oonoiliate our expectations 
and the reality concerning tlii^ work, it cannot lie doubted that it was 
looked upon as very important, since tliree writers liave commented, 
upon it and supplemented it soon after the death of tlie sa2:e. These are 
Kung-yang, Kuh-liaiiff. and Tso Kiu-ming, whose resjiective works 
have l)een inrlndcd among the classics under the Sung dynasty. Their 
remarks <n\ the special words used by the Master in such and such cir- 
cumstances must be noticed as an answer to possible doubtson the au- 
thorship of Confucius in the case of that work. 

587) As reported by Mencius, III, i, ix, S. 

58H) Of. J. Legge, Chinese Chssics, vol. V., p. 3i. 

589) Cf. J. liegj-e, ibifl., p. 5, 6, 14, and especially, 40-49, intmd. ; 

34, U, 210, 283, 404, 46(5, &c Arthur H. Smith, Chinese charac- 

teri'^tics, 1892. p. 32. 

590) And confirmed by Szema Tsien, She k/\ kiv, 47, in general terms, 

591) The fen and tten, cf. supra note 516 and infra note 593 and 
text. 

592) Cf. Chiv. Class., Ill, intr. p. 4. 

593) Kung Ngan-kwoh. in his preface, gives this information on these 
lost two works, which existed yet at the time of Confucius Lao Tan, 
Lieh tze, &c. The present work called San fen by Mao Tsien in 1084, 
is a made up composition which perhaps "Contains a few fragments of 
the old work, but is certainly not the lost book recovered as it pre- 
tends to be. — A San fen shu, vFith a Commentary by Yuen Han of 
the Tsin dynasty (400 A.d.). is included in the Han-Wei collection 
of reprints. On some archaisms which cannot be a forgery in that 
work, Cf. R. K. Douglas, The Calendar of the Ilia dynasty, introd. '' 

594) Cf. T. de L., The oldest Book of the Chinese, § 37, n. 2. 

595) The Book of Poetry or She King existed before his time (cf. Chin. ^ 
Class. V, 4), and the work of Confucius in editing it, consisted in / 
the suppression, (and alteration in words or composition of ideograms) V 
of that he did not find serviceable for the incalculation of propriety 
and righteousness. fCf. She Ki, kiv. 46). 

596) Cf. however the Hi-tse (II. 15) great appendix of the Yh King. — 
Tso tchien, 10, XVII., ann. 525, and another passage of the same 
chronicle. 

597) Sung, 2103 Bas.— A'V, 4098 ^Q.$.—Ki-trhou 9225 .238lBas.— , 
Tchuh,10U B^i. — Kiii, 8959 Bas Tchen, 11783 Bas. 

598 J Cf. Tso tchnen. s, xiv., 1. 

599) Lun yu, iii., 9. — In the Tchnng yting, xxviii., ri, he makes a dis- 
tinction between the two, and says that ceremonies of the Shang-yu ^ 
dynasty were still continued in the State of Sung. 

600) Cf, Kang kien y tchi luh. — Medhurst, JTncient China, p. 370. — 
Cf. also Li Ki, XVII. , iii., 19, for shght variants. 

601) Cf. Tso tchuen, 10, XVII. 

602) According to the rectified chronology, the dates of the reigns of these ^ 
founders were the folhjwing : Huang-Ti, 228r;-2232 b.c— Shao Hao 
2276-2213.— Kao- Yang tchuen hiim hiuh, 2225-2147.— Kao Sin Ti 
Kuh, 2160-2085.— Ti Tchih, 2085-2076.— Yao, 2076-1976.— Shun, 
202.-1965 i!.c. 

608) Shuh belonged to the Princely family of the native State of Yii, in 



144 ORIGIN OP THE EA.RLY CHINKSE CIVILISATION. 

S.E. Shaiisi, which he had left, and wlncli was conquered by the Chin- 
ese in 2018 B.C. Cf. S'.oma Tsien, She Ju, 1., ^l';- ^.P. 64, ^ v. ; 
IJ5 Qy,-.Meng.tze's (iv., 2, ii., 1) stateu.ent that Shun was ^tung y 
tchijen, a man of the Eastern Barbarians, is thus expUuned satistacto- 
rily i the barbarians here being the native tribes who had not yet ac- 
knowledged the government of Yao. 



[Chaf. vie. Part III. Fifth Period : 481-224 b.c] 

Sect. A, General Survey. Formation of Neo-Taoism and Taoszeism. 

163. During the period which embraces the evolution of Chinese civi- 
lisation, from the beginning of the internecine wars between tlie states- 
contending for the final supremacy, to the foundation of the Empire^ 
there was a great disorder everywhere. Each of the principalities was- 
independent, and had ceased to take any care of the general welfare and 
of the time honoured habits and customs. Therefore we cannot be sur- 
prised that notwithstanding the political troubles, rehgious innovations- 
and material progresses of foreign origin should characterise this period. 
The two channels, through which they were imported into China, were- 
that of the Ssea-traders of the Indian Ocean in Shantung which ceased 
about 375 b.c, and the south-west route from India and the West. In 
the North-west the state of Ts'in whose fate it was to become the- 
nucleus of the Chinese Empire at the end of the period, grew more and 
more civilised from its contact with the other states of the agglomeration,. 
and the barbarous elements in its population were greatly softened away. 
No intercourse seems however to have been renewed with the further 
west, and there was no change in the stoppage in that direction which 
wo have mentioned during the last period (§ 147) for outside rela- 
tions. 

164. The number of states forming the Chinese dominion was reduced 
to six important ones besides that of Ts'in^^*, and the period is often 
called from this fact in Chinese history. Period of the six kingdoms.. 
Some states once important, disappeared altogether^^^^ such as that of 
Ts'Ao (?— 866-487), Tch'en (?— 854-479), Wo (?— 656-473), Ts'ai 



146 ORIGIN OF THE EAHLY 

{1110-447), TsiN (?— 858-37G), Tch'eng (806-375 b.c). Others were re- 
duced to the rank of attached states^*^'', such were Lu (1110-409), Wei 
(1103-414) and Sung (1001-404 b.c.) Moreover a very large number 
of small principalities were absorbed and their territories contributed to 
enlarge those of their conquerors. The six states which survived were 
the following, Ts'i (1091-221) ; Yen (?— S64-222); and Ts'a (?— 1078- 
223) amongst the ancients, and three new ones : Tchao (517-457-228 
cap. Han-tan ; Wei (453-408-231) cap. Ta Liang ; and Han (453- 
423-225 B.C.) cap. Tcheng. The independance of the states from the 
traditional allegance to itlie House of Tchou, is best shown by the 
respective dates when their rulers assumed the dignity of Wang or king 
'°'', which belonged to the Ruler of the Central state : Ts'u in G71 ; 
Ts'i in 373; Wei in 370; Yen and Han in 3»2; TchAo and Ts'in 
in 325 B.C. 

165. As to the Central^ Kingdom of Tchou, its fortune had fallen, and 
until its disappearance in 249, when the last King of this ouce glorious 
dynasty was reduced to tlie condition of a private man by the King of 
Ts'u, it had hardly any political standing during the period. It was 
however in charge of the traditional rites, and the famous Tchou-U or 
Ritual of the Tchou dynasty was then completed, probably about the year 
430 B.c.« 08 The ffi c i a 1 B o o k o f T c h o u or Tchou Kivan, as such 
was its title at the time, was based upon the list of officers of the State 
administration organized by Tchou Kung^^^ when regent of the Kingdom 
(1103 B.C.) and of which the first scheme forms one of the chapters of 
the Shic King (V, xx) also called Tchou Kwan. It grew by subse- 
quent additions of offices and functions during tha following centuries 
down to the latter part of the fifth century, when the descendants of Wen 
Wang and Wu Wang had fallen too low to be able to make any furthe 
regulations. It may be looked upon as the political will of the vanishing 
dynasty, in which was embodied the administration of tlie country as they 
bad dreamed it, but not such as it ever was at any time^-"-". 

As the Tchou-li contains many references to innovations introduced 
during the Tchou dynasty, the story of its composition required to be 
noticed here*^^^. 

166. The condition of general disorder which prevailed during that 
period was unfavorable to the extension througliout the Chinese dominion 
of any uniform system of views. Lao Tan and Confucius were gone^^^^ 
sadder if not wiser men, without seeing the success of their doctrines, 
although the former was perhaps less unfortunate under that respect. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 147 

than his younger contemporary. Soon after their disparition their teach- 
ings flourished. The school of wonderism, whicli had grown out of the 
influence of the trader-colonists of the Indian Ocean settled at Lang-ga 
and Tsih-Moh who had taught Astrology and an overrated conception of 
tha transforming powers of nature, amalgamated with the pure Taoism of 
Lao-tze, and formed henceforth what may be called the Neo-Taoism 
or T ao -szeis m^^3^ while Confucianism remained in opposition to it, 
such as his founder had conceived it against the encroachments of Won- 
derism, Taoism, and Shara.anisra. It was indeed the rising of Confu- 
cianism which led to the fusion of these various elements. 

1S7. This important transformation deserves all attention. Indifferent 
and matter-of-fact by nature, the Chinese had hitherto shown little 
curiosity and interest in all questions of historical origin and ontology, 
with their usual accompaniment of fabulous reports. They had neglected 
to investigate these problems, and the legends of early times imported 
from the West by Hwang-ti and his Balctribes, and preserved in the 
Royal Archives, had received little care and attention. With the ex- 
ception of the Kiiei-tsang of the HiA and 3jm4.ng dynasties^ ^*,and of;the 
Th-Jcing which had been edited from slips bearing the various meanings 
of some ideograms^ ^5, httle seems to have been done, and they remained 
as unused documents known only of the very few. But when arose the 
feehng of curiosity and taste for wonders, which the foreigners of Lang- 
ga and Tsih-moh had awaken among them, and were keeping up by their 
continuous flow of novelties, many Chinese found a national satisfaction 
in studying the old /e7ij,nd f/ertjecords of their Archives, which Lao 
Tan had made use of in writing his Tao teh hing {supra, note 516). The 
School of Wonderism, if it deserves to be so-called, was thus led to lay 
hold of the pure teaching of Taoism by itself too abstruse by far, as a 
peg for their elucubrations. From the fusion of these two movements so 
different and so opposed one another, and its absorption of the natural 
shamanism^iT disallowed by Confucianism, resulted the mixed school of 
philosophy, religion and superstition known asTa o- sz e -is m which 
has survived to the present day, and has become one of the grossest as- 
semblage of superstitions which have ever existed. 

168. The Ancient traditions and texts were eagerly sought for, and 
all sorts of incidents, stories and marvellous accounts were brought to 
light by the writers of the new school, such as Lieh-tze, Tchwang-tze and 
others, in support of their views and theories ; the new ideas which were 
reaching China at that time were joined to old^traditious^^^, so as to 



148 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

make new combinations illustrating their own conceptions, and every frag- 
ment of primitive legends in China became embellished with new circum- 
stances. Romantic and wonderful accounts hitherto little known in the 
realistic Chinese literature of former ages began from that time. Tso 
Kiu-Ming in writing his precious chronicle parallel to the Tchun tsiu 
of Confucius, although fettered to some extent by some Confucianist 
prejudices, could not himself escape entirely the influence of this remark- 
able movement. 

169. Lao Tan having taken his cosmogony, as we have seen in the 
previous part (§ 133-137) from some old texts where teachings of Hwang- 
ti were preserved the name of the first leader of the Chinese was asso- 
ciated to that of the old philosopher, to denominate the new school, and 
Hwang-Lao appears as a name to that effect under the Han dynasty^^^, 
but after that period, instead of Hwang, the use of which had become 
awkward since it was part uf the imperial title, the name of Tchwang 
(tze) was used in its stead, and the appellation disappeared afterwards. 

170. The old texts in which were embodied the traditional lessons of 
Hwang-ti were edited and commented; and thus enlarging upon the really 
important part occupied by the early leaders in the history of the civili- 
sation of the country, all that was considered as fundamental and the 
principle of every thing, was by a regular extension of views^-*^ attributed 
to tliem. Shennung shared with Hwang-ti the suggested authorship of 
some ancient fragments, and the catalogue of Literature in the Annals 
of the Former Han dynasty gives evidence to that effect. The name of 
Hwang-ti appears in the titles of fourteen works, on philosophy, the yn 
and yang principles medecine, and spirits. Five works concerning Shen- 
nung, are on husbandry, the five elements, omens and spirits, and a wtrk 
on diet bears the joint names of Shennung and Hwang-ti. Some of 
these works are stated to have been compiled during the Period of the 
six states, i.e. the period we are studying at present (cf. § 1G4), while 
others were older^^'. Compositions embodying alleged views and prin- 
ciples of Tchwan-hiuh, Yao, Shun, &c. were also written about that time. 

171. The philosophical and literary activity of the Tao-szeists became 
very great during the fourth and third centuries B.C., in the states of Wei 
and Ts'i, and still more so in the state of Yen (Pctchih) wliich* was less 
disturbed by the internecine wars. The descendants and disciples of Lao 
Tan who preserved less unsuUied the teachings of their master had come to 
the state of Wei (N. Honan).622 Lang-ga itself, which had been for a 
long time the most important centre of the new movement liad become 



CHI>IE3E CIVILISATrON. 149 

involved in the wars.^-' 

So numerous are the names of these philosophers which history has 
preserved, and wliose writings are in some cases still existing, that this 
activity must have been very great. 

172. Among the disciples of Lao Tan, gradually diverging from his 
teachings withnut however passing to Taoszeism, let us remember the 
names of Wen-tze,^-* Yang tchu^-'' (c. -450 b.g.^, W.mg hli otherwise 
Kwei kuh tze (c. 380), Tchang-y (d. 312), Su Ts'in (d. 318), Hoh kwau 
tze (325-378 b c.) and others. Meh-tze^^s (c.iOO) and Meng-tze (372- 
289 B.C.) known of all as Mencius, deserve to be mentioned separately 
as having stated views of tlieir own more divergent than the others. 

173. Among the Taoszeists, we must mention On Kihien, and Hu-tze 
of TcHENG ; the latter was the master of Lieh tze; Lieh Yu-kou or Lieh 
tze (c. 400 B.C.) who himself had many disciples, and from his native state 
of TcHKNO went to that of Wei \^^'' Tchwang-Tchou or Tchwang- 
tze of Wki in the IVth century ;6'^8 Tsou^hien of Ts'i (c. 378-300), 
who created an important school. After visiting the King Hwei of Wei 
at Liang, and the Prince of Tchao at Ping-yuen, he went, specially in- 
vited, to live near the King Tchao (311-273 b.c) of Yen. wlio built the 
palace called Kieh-shih Kung (near the present Peking) for him and his 
followers. ^2^ Among his disciples tlie most famous were the following : 
Sun-K'iiig of Tchao, who was fifty years old when he adopted his doct- 
rines, and who became later on the teacher of Li-sze, the famous prime 
minister of Ts'in She Hwang-ti ; Shun yii Kwan and Tien ping Tsieh 
tze of Ts'i, Hwan-yuen of ^s'u, Shen Tao and Siin Ic ing of Tchao 
who were all famous for their profession of the Hwang-Lao doctrines, e^o 
In th>? state of Yen, Sang Wu-ki, Tcheng-pe Kiao, and Tch'ung shang, 
have also their names preserved in history. ^^^ — But the most famous of all 
were Lieh-tze, Tchwang-tze, and Tsou-hien, whom we shall have to men- 
tion ajrain further on. 



o^ 



Notes 

604) Since the time of Hiao Kung in 361 b.c, the Ts'in state gave up 
the Rites of i'caoa to fallow those of the Shang dynasty. 1 liis was 
done to show its independence. In 336 B.C., the King of Tchou 
transterred to the Prince of Ts'in the privilege of issuing the imperial 
coinage, i.e. coins without nama of the issuer. Of. my catalogue of 
Ch 7ie<e coins, introd. p. xiv. 

605) The quiry shows thit tliare is some uncertainty on their exact be- 
ginning, although it is claimed that they all began with the Tchou 
dynasty, i.e. in IJlU b.c. 



150 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

606) They were respectively extinguished in 249, 209 and 286 res_ 

pectively. 
■607) Wimg, Ruler or King was the usual title of the Rulers of China 
sinoe the Shang dynasty, when it took the place of Ho u, S ove reign 
which was used during the Hia dynasty. Previously to that time 
since Yu Nai Hwang ti, the name of the ruler was preceeded hy Ti 
divine, such as Ti Yuo, Ti Shiiu, which was used alone when adress 
ing them or speaking of tlieni. (Cf. Shu king, Part I). At tlie be- 
ginning of the Hia dynasty, Tien tzf, Son of Heaven appears for 
the first time instead of 2V {ibid. Ill, iv. 5). Hwang, an emphasized 
form of }Fang, king, and written ideographically s e 1 f -j- k i n g was 
used in speaking of the Royal Ancestors, during the same dynasty 
{ibid. Ill, iii, 4), and began to be employed for the living sovereign at 
the end of the Yn dynastv {ibid. V. iV, 9, 10, 11, 15). The com- 
bination Hwang Ti, Divine s e 1 f - R u 1 e r, appeare<l for the first 
time in 930, in speaking of -Ihe ancient 'Ti Yu {ibid. V, xxvii, 5, 6) 
and eeems to haN^e been seldom used until the foundation of the Chin- 
ese Empire in 2:^1 b.c. when it was adopted as the designation of the 
Emperor. It has remained in use since then. The outcome of this 
note is that to speak of the early Emperors of China is a misnomer. 
In some historical works such as the Bamboo Annals, the prefixing 
of Ti was continued until the end of the Hia dynasty. — ^The statements 
on the subject in L. de Rosnj', La civilisation Japonaise, p. 134, are 
not based on ancient authorities. 
60s) The inference is drawn from the following statements: "Tchod ICao 
Wang (440-426 B.C.) has appointed his younger brother to the south 
of the Ho. He is Hwan Kung ; i suh Tchou hung tchi kwan shih, 
' for supplement to Tchou kung directions of officers." She ki, Kiv. 
4, f. 27 — Hwang Fu-mi, Ti wang she ki, says : K'ao Tcheh wang 
appointed his younger brother Kieh to the south of the Ho ; Suh Tchou 
knnq tchi kwan, litt.? continue (or supplement) Tchou kung's officers. 
(09; The observations made with the Gnomon about 1100 b.c. at Loh- 
yang and mentioned (supra § 94 as verified by Laplace and Biot, are 
reported in the Kiv. ix, 17 of the Tchou li. Cf. trad. Biot, vol. I. p. 
201, and introductlun, p. x. 
€10j The Kingdom of Tchou was an aggregate of print:ipalities under 
the suzerainty of the successors of Wu Wang : and each of these 
principalities had their own administration imitated from that of the 
Central Kingdom but on a smaller scale. Now this Central Kingdom 
never did cover a large area, and after the Compulsory transfer of the 
Capital to Loh-yang. it was indeed a small affair. Even in the palmy 
days of the first period, the revenue and populations of the state would 
not have been sufficient to keep up so numerous a staff as that des- 
cribed in the Tchoii-h. The figures are enormous. Here they are for 
five of the six Ministries : (i) 3920; (ii) 9609; (iii) 3633 ; (iv) 5080; 
(v) 3787 ; total 20029 persons in (59, 64, 58, 65 and 58) three 
hundred and four administrative sections. If as prob ble the sixth 
Ministry was on the average of the others, the staff of the Government 
of the Central Kingdom would have included about 31235 individuals. 
€11) It has been preserved in its entirety, save the last of its six books, 
for wliich another one said to be of Ancient date has been supplied 
during the Han dynasty. The work has been assailed in several in- 




CHINESE CIVILISATIOK. 151 

stance?, by the Hwang-ti, in 2l3 n.c. who \yanted it to be destroyed. 
and afterwards because of its regulations which dis[)leased later rulers 
For this history of. Ed. Biot, Introduction to his transla'^ion, pp. ix- 
XXX . J. Legge, introd. to his translation of the Li ki, p. 1-5 ; Alex. 
Wyhe, Notes on Chinese literature, p. 4. 

612) Lao Tan had gone away long before the demise of Confucius which 
happened in 479 B.C. 

Cl;>) Tliis convenient term, as a distinctive from Taoism has been hap- 
pily coined by Prof. L. de Rosny, more than twenty years ago. Should 
not the word Taoizcism have been already in use, I would have pre- 
ferred myself that of Neo-Taoisni. 

614) The Kuei-tsang contained a certain number of the primitive legends 
quoted as used in divination by Hi a Hou Ki (1946-1937 B.C.) the 
son and successor of the Great Yu. Unhappily the work is lost, and 
is known to us but through quotations by ancient writers. On this 
work. Cf. T. de L., The Oldest Book of the Chinese, 1892, pp. xi- 
xiii, xxi, and 29. And some extracts in Tai pii.g yu Ian, Kiv. 35, f. 
1 ; 373, 2 ; 9U, 3 ; 929, 1 ; &c. ; and in Shan hai king, edit. Pih 
Yuen 1781, Kiv. 2, f. U, Uv. ; 7. 1 ; 17, 3 ; &c. 

615) Cf. siqvil ch. IV, sect, b, 2 4. 

616) Besides tlie Kuei-tsang and the FA King, we may refer also to the 
fragments of Yii-hiiing of the Xlth century, and of Kuan Y-wu of 
the Vllth. Other works concerning them have existed in antiquity 
but they have not escaped the wrecks of literLtture in the course of 
centuries. 

617) The New-Taoism has gradually absorbed the gods of the aboriginal 
populations of the country as well as all novelties from the outside. 
The oldest information we possess on the native worship is given by 
the Sha»-hai king, but it has not yet been investigated. It consists 
of descriptions of local gods made apparently by some writers of the 
Neo-Taiiist school. 

618) Cf. the excellent remarks of Dr. J. Edkins on this precise point, in 
his short paper on Ancient Navigation in the Indian Ocean, I.e. p. 
23, — Cf. also by the same scholar on early Taoism : Phases in the de- 
velopment of Tauism : Trans. China Br. R.A.S., 1885, v. 4 ; Ow early 
Tauist Alchemy : Shanghae Miscellany ; Steps iii the groivth of early 
Tauism : China Review, XV., 176-190. 

619) For instance in Szema Tsien, She Ki, Kiv. 28, f. 21 v. : Hwang- 
Lao j/ en ; and Kiv. 71-, f. 4: Kiai hioh Hwang Lao tao teh tchi shu, 
they all studied the Tao and Teh of Hwang Lao. The author refers to 
several writers of that school. — It also occurs in the 2'sien Han shu, 
Biographies, 3-'. — In the list of works existing in 983a. d. (infra note 
6-1 ) appears a Hicang Lao King. 

€20) Cf. with reference to Ilwang-ti, J. Edkins, Place of Hicang-ti in 
early Tauism : China Review, 1887, p. 233-239. 

621) Tsien Han Shu, Kiv. 30. Herewith the list of these works. Class 11, 
On 2\io: Hwang-ti and four Kings, 4 piens ; Hwang-ti's princes and 
ministers, 10 p. ; Miscellanies ou Hwang-ti, 58 p.; (all said to have 
been written at the time of the six Kingdoms). — CI. 18, Husbandry: 

— Shennung, 2^ p, CI. 19. Talks -.—Hwang ti's talks, 40 p. 

CI. 31. Five elements: Hwang ti's Yn and Yang, 25 Kiv, ; 
Discourses of the time of Hwang-ti on Yn and Yang, 25 Kiv. ; Shen- 



162 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

nnng's Great mystery of the five element?, 27 Kiv. CI. 33. D ivin- 

a tioa : On auspicious hnsl)andry according to Shennung. — CI. 35. 
Medicine: ' Hwang ti nei King, 18 Kiv. CI. 36. Local Med- 
icine: — The tablets of Hwang-ti, -?.f> Kiv. (said to be a genuine 

work); Sheti-nung and HvTang-ti on diet.. 7 Kiv CI. 37. D om- 

estic Medicine: -A worlc on the principles of Hwang-ti, Yao, Shun, 
and Yli. — —CI. 3^'. — Spirits and Genii: — Four works concer- 
ning Hwang-ti and one Sliennung. In the li;<t of 1690 works fr^m 

which extracts are quoted in the Tai j^lng yii Ian Cyclopedia of 98S 

A.D., ten bear the name of Hwang-ti. In tlie Han Wei literature, 

a work called Hwang-ti Shu on divination is quoted. Al. Wylie in 
his Notes on Chinese Literature, p. 77, says that the oldest medie-al trea- 
tise extant (in China) is [irobably tlie Hioang-ti su wen, which, with- 
out admitting its claim to be the production of Hwang-ti, there is rea- 
son to believe it to liavebeen written several centuries before Ciirist, and 
to contain a summary of the traditional knowledge of medicine lianded 
down from tlie most remote times. The Hwang-ti su wen form tlie first 
half of the modern Hwang-ti nei King, of which the first European 
translation has been given abridged by Prof. Ch. de Harlez, in his 
Textes Taoistes, p. 341 sq. 
62 1') She Ki, Kiv. 73. 

623) Lang-ya was for the first time submitted to Ts'i in 547. then tO' 
Wu in 493, to Yueh in 472 of which it remained the capital until 

' 380 B.C. when it was given up because of the ciyil wars, which made 
the place unsafe. 

624) Wen-tze was the most remarkable. His literary remains are em- 
bodied in the later work which bears his name and has been translated 
in C. de Harlez, Textes Tuoi-^tes, p. 83-161. — Cf. also G. v. d. Gabe- 
lentz, das taoistische Werk Wen-tsl : Dec. 1887. 

625) On Yang tchu's (pinions, cf. J. Legge, Chinese Classics, vol. II, 
p. 9n-108 of introduction. 

626) Meh-Tih or Meh-tze, who taught Universal love. On his opinions 
cf. J. Legge, ibid., p. 1(3-1 25, and E. Faber, die Grundgeilanken des 
alien chinesischen Socialismus, oder die Lehre des PJuhsophcn Micius 
Elberfeld, 1877. Also G. v, d. Gabelentz, Ueber den Chinesinchen 
PhUosophen Meh Tik : B.x\. K. Sachs. G. d. W. Jul. 1888. 

627) Lieli-tze was flourishing in 3'.)7 r..c. as shown in China Review, 
1.J ay-June 1885, p. 409. — His full name was Lieh Yii-K'ou. The 
name Yii-k'on was known in Ts'i in 550 b.c. Cf. Tso tchuen, 9, xxiii, 
8. — Lieh tz} quotes Tze-tch'an, a famous minister of Tcheng, 
who lived in 575-496 B.C. — He was himself belonging to the same 
principality which was destroyed in 375 B.C. by the Han state. — In 
the literary catalogue of 9 b.c. there is an entry of a wnrk in 8 books 
under his name. Cf. Tsien Han shu, kiv. 30, sect. U. — The work 
which exists at present under his name, also in eigiit chapters, was 
apptirently written down by his disciples, and " may yet be actej)ted as 
a iair specimen of his teaching. " Cf. J. Legge, Texts of Taoism, 1, 
p. 5. — His work has been abridged and translated by C. de Harlez, 
Textes Taoistes, pp. 180 339, with evidence of the existence of Lieh- 
tze which had been doubted by some writers, such as F. H. Balfour, 
heaves from my Chinese Books, p. 83 sq., and others. Cf. also on 
Lieh-tze, E. Faher, Der Naiuralismus bee den alten Chinesen, oder die 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 153 

samnitlichen werke des Pliilosophen Licius, Elberfekl, 1877. 

028) Tchwang-tze was flourishing in 368 and also after 339 b.c. He 
quotes Lieli-tzp, His writings liavc been translated in full by : Fred 
eric Henry Balfour. The Divine Classic of Nanhua ; helng the works 
of Chuang t:e, Shanghai, 1881. — Herbert A. Giles, Chuang tzii, 
Mi/stic, Moralist and Social reformer, 1889. — J. Legge, IVte Texts of 
Taoism, 1891, yol. I, p. 125-392, vol. If, p. 1-232,— And partly by 
C. de Harlez, Textes J'aoistes, 1S91. Cf. also Georg vnn der Gabel- 
entz, Die Sprache des Cuang-trt, Leipzig, 1888 ; Der Rauber Tschik, 
ein satirischer Ahschnitt ecus T.schuang-ts]\ April 1889. 

029) A short resume of his views is given in S/w-ki, kiv. 74. 
C3G) For the explanation of this term cf. supra, par. 109 and note. 

031) Nearly all the information we possess abaut them comes from Sze- 
uia Tsicn. Sh' Ki, kiv. 28 and 74. 



f 



[Chap. VII.—Fifth Pkriod : 481-221 b.c] 

Sect. B) Influences by the North-East . 

174:. The two eniporia of Lnng-ya and Tsih-moh on the gulf of Kiao- 
tchou in S. Shantung, which the foreign traders of the Indian Ocean and 
Erythrsean sea had established about 680 b.c had various fortunes. In 
547 B.C. they had acknowledged the suzerainty of the great state of Ts'i, 
and in 493, had been conquered by the state of Wu. In 472 the latter 
state was destroyed by its southern neighbour, the kingdom of Vueh 



156 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

which transferred the seat of its capital at Lang-ya where it remained for 
92 years. In 380 the war raging between the states of Ts'i, of Ts'u, 
and of YuEH compelled the latter to withdraw from its advanced position 
ill the North. ^32 Lang'ya was evacnated^^^ and remained waste until 
2:20 hen it was rebuilt by Ts'iN she Hwang ti.^^* Ts-h-moh, for several 
years previously had supported in his gradual encroachments Tien Ho, a 
grandee of the state of Ts'i, who finally in 386 overthrew his legal Prince, 
and assumed for himself the supreme authority with the title of Tai 
Kung Ho. ^35 fiig result of that support was felt all over the princi- 
pality of Ts'i by the establishment of the worship of the Eight Hindu 
Vasus, as we shall see below. In the year 370 the native governor of 
Tsih-moh was rewarded by the erection of his authority into a Chinese 
ta/a.^^^ But the foreign sea traders came no more, as a shorter and 
more convenient route had been discovered for their commerce, as we 
shall see further on (sect, c), 

175. Numismatics furnish monumental evidence of the great influence 
exercised by these Emporia. Their Monetary Unions with several in- 
land places testify of the activity of their commercial relations. We have 
already noticed (§ 103) that the first stamped money in Chinese lands 
had been issued by the mint of Tsih-moh in (175-670 b.c, and we need 
not insist here again on this most important fact. Between 580 and 

/(J' 550, the same mint, in connection with guild-merchants of An-yang and 
of Kai-yang belonging to their next neighbour the state of Kiu, issued 
a currency of large knife -money similar to that issued before at Tsih- 
moh only. Between 547 anil 49o, the merchants of the latter place in 
connection with guild-merchants of Yng-ling capital city of Ts'i, and of 
Kai-yang, issued also a currency of the same kind. Lang-ya, between 
the years 472 and 380, in connection with merchants of Yang yh and 
Lu, in Shansl C. and S. issued a currency of large plate (pu) coins. 
These various issues are illustrated^'*' in my Catalogue of Chinese corns, 
from the Vllth cent. u.c. to a.d. 621, including the series In the Bnthh 
Museum (18'J;i). 

176. We have already remarked, in a previous paragraph (108) of the. 
fourth period, that the influence in East China, of the sea traders of the 
Indian Ocean having their emporia on the South coast of Shantung, dis- 
played transformations which, after the lapse of time required by the 
ge> 'graphical distance, corresponded or ought to correspond to changes at 
the fountain head of their trade. Three successive waves somewhat diff"er- 
ent in character can be discerned during the three centuries that this 



CHIVKSK CIVlLISATtON. 157 

influence existed. 

During the seventh century, epoch of tlie first wave, tlie chief notions 
which niJiated from their Sliantuny emporia were chiefly Sabseo-Piiooni- 
cian, with few Babylonian and Hindu elements which they had adopted 
hitherto. This we have shown in our paragraphs 104 and 105. It re- 
sulted from the introduction of the Plioenician navy in tlie Erythtean sea 
{^supiil, 113-111)), which we have described, 

177. The second wave began much later in the seventh century, 
nnd consisted chiefly of pjirolatric notions, occasionally mixed with a 
sort of dualism, which we enumerate further on (§ 181-186) . But these 
notions, rather varied, cannot be ascribed in any definite manner, as far 
as I am aware, either to Mazdeism as described in tlie Gathas, or to 
thePersian creed shown on the Behistun inscription. They may have 
been related to the variety of Zoroastrianism that was practised l)y the 
Akhfemenians when they conquered Elam under Tchaispaish (Teispes) 
sometime about, probably before, 600 b.c.^**, for the Avestic character 
of several of these notions is clear and cai>not be mistaken. Now we 
know that ships could go there inland, for Nearchus was able to take to 
Susa his fleet when arriving from India, ^-^^ and tiierefore some of these 
peculiar and ancient Mazd^ans may have taken part in the eastern sea- 
trade*^*^. The more soutliern ports of Siraf and of Omana were not yet 
opened at that time^^^. 

The third wave of influence is more Hindu than anything else, as shown 
below, in the paragraplis 191-195. It began in the fifth century and does 
not seem to have been altered until that same foreign sea trade of the 
Gulf of Kiao-tchou came to an end, 

178. On Wednesday, the 28th day of October 539"^, the Persians 
under Cyrus had conquered Babylon and thus put an end to the Baby- 
lonian Monarchy. In 525, the conquest of Egypt increased the facilities 
for international exchange of views and notions. ^^^ After 512 b.c. 
Darius anxious to know where the Indus emptied itself into the sea'"'*'', 
sent ^maritime expedition under the command of the Karian Greek 
Skylax with orders to sail down the river from a certain point in the 
Paktyiea region on the upper course of the Indus. They followed the 
stream eastwards and westwards until they reached the sea ; two years 
and a half altogether of navigation led them to the head of the Red 
Sea^^s. Tije expedition therefore did not attempt to ascend the Persian 
Gulf. Herodotus (IV, 44) says that when this voyage was completed, 
Darius conquered the Indians and made use of the sea in those parts. 




-^fjP'.LIFOf 



158 ORIGIN OF THE TARLY 

An Indian influence must therefore have been felt for a time afterwards 
among the Erythra?an sea traders. At first mixed with tlie previons 
influence wliicli obtained among them, it gradually liecame prevalent, 
but some time must necessarily have elapsed before it could be felt, and 
some longer time still before it produced a distinct and tangible effect 
as far as the most distant stations of the trade, such as thos3 of the 
coast of Shantung. 

179. When, less than two centuries later (i.e in 325 b.c.) Alexander 
sent out the expedition of Nearchus to explore the course ef the Indus- 
all memory of the similar and previous voyage of Skylax would seem to 
have disappeared.^*^ Maritime trade was in the hands of Hindus, and it 
is doubtless from them that Nearchus and Onesicritus^*' got the curious 
astronomical statements which they liave reported, and which shows that 
those who made them used to travel in the Indian Ocean, and advanced 
far enough to the South to be well within the tropic.*^ ^^ We may there- 
fore conclude that the Northerners, i.e. the inhabitants of Northern In- 
dia and the re^iion of the Persian Gulf had then little interest, if any, 
left in the Southern Sea trade. 

180. With the removal of the capital of Ydeh from Lang-ya. the sea- 
trade of the Gulf of Kiao-tchon in S. Shantung seems to have come to 
an end. The traders of the Indian Ocean and Erythraean Sea ceased to 
frequent the emjDoria of Tsih-moh and Lang-ya. They may have frequen- 
ted for a certain time afterwards the entrance of the Yang-tze Kiang at 
the proximity of the new capital city of Yueh, which was the modern 
Su-tchou, but we have no evidence in the present state of our researches, 
in favour or against this probability. About 375, the scanty knowledge 
which these sharp seafarers had imparted of their route, among endless fa- 
bles, had hardly anything left to substantiate it, and the whole had passed 
to mythology and fables. Difficulties on their route which arose from the 
hostility of natives against the revictualling of their ships, had most pro. 
bably for some time before diminished the frequency of journeys made by 
these bold adventurers. This is suggested by circumstances related in the 
fables concerning the Five (afterwards Three) Fortunate islands which we 
have examined before.'^ '^^ The route through Indo-China saved a great 
deal of sea-faring, and, frequented since in the previous century, it took 
the place of the former and longer journey. 

Notes 

632) The capital was removed to Wu, whose name has survived as that 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. J 59 

r 

of tlie prefcctuial city of Su-tchon, in Kiang-su. 

633) On tliese events cf. Szenia Tsien, Kiv. 32, fol. 27. — i'chvh shu ki 
nien, V, 30, ann. 23. — Wit ijuch tchnn tsni ; T.P., Kiv. 160, fol. 6 
V. — T. de L., Catalogue of Chinese coini^, p. liv, Ixii, Ixiii. 

634) He establislied there a population of 20 or 30 thousand families, 
cf. Szenia Tsien, kiv. 6, fol. U v., 26 ; kiv. 2,8, fol. 12. 

635) The Teen family since the days of Tien Tchang had been by them- 
selves a state in the State. T'ion Tchang put to death Duke Kien 
in 481 and placed Ping Kung on the throne. In 386 his grandson 
T'ien Ho removed the reigning l)uke K'ung from his capital, and 
placed him in the city of Hai-pin {60 It E. of Fu-ning hien in Tchihli, 
N.) where he might maintain the sacrifices to his ancestors, and where 
he led an inglorious life until his death in 379. Cf. Szoma Tsien, 
kiv. 32, fol. L^7. 

636) Cf. Hoh tchi, Ts'c moh tclii, 1753, kiv. i, f. ii.—She kl, Tien tai 
kung she kia. 

637) Cf. pp. 215-219, 224-226 ; 105. 

638) diUnder of Cyrus, Inscript. 1. 21.- Cf. Sir Henry Rawlinson, Notes 
on a Clay Cylinder of Cyrus the Great : J.R.A.S. 1380, XII, 70-97. 
—A. H. Sayce, Herodotus, 1^83, p. 43?, 482. 

639)i Arrian. Jruhca, c. 42. — Bunhury, Ancient Geography, I, 539. 

640) The inland trade with Media and its connection with the Erythraean 
sea trade existed some time earlier as shown by the quince fruits which 
the sea-farers of Shantung introduced in China before 660 b.c. This 
date might require confirmation from anotlier source of evidence 
than that of the Chinese critics in their classification of the odes, which 
is the only one on which it rests at present. Cf. supra, n. 389. 

641) None of them is mentioned by Nearchus in liis journey along the 
coasts. 

642) According to the calculations of Dr. J. Oppert, communicated to 
the Academic des Inscriptions, Dec. 23, 1892. 

648) Cf. sicpj-il on Egyptian .nfluences ic Persia, N. 364. 

644) Herodot. I"\ , ii. The report of the journey of Skylax of Kari- 
anda, was still existing at tho time of Aristotle (Politic. VII, 13. 1). 

645) E. H. Bunbury, Bistory of Ancient Geography, I, 227. 

646) Bunbury, O.C. I. 227. 

647) Arrian, Indica, c. 25.— Pliny, YL, 23, § 98. 

648) They found the shadows not to follow the same rules as in other 
countries, but either the sun was vertical at noon, or the r^hadow was 
cast to the south. He added that the constellations and stars, which 
had usually been high in the heavens, now were only just above the 
liorizon, and those Uiat were elsewhere constantly visible, 'ose and set 
again after a short interval.'— Bunbury, Q.C., I., 534-5, 543, and 548- 
549. 

64(0 Supra §122-1:?6. 



Innovations concerning Fire. 
181. We lave briefly in a previous paragraph (106) alluded to the 
new notions concerning fire, which made their appearance in the Chinese 



y 



1 CO OUKUJJ OF THE EARLY 

states of tlie East in proximity with the foreign settlements of S. Shantung 
in the sixtli century. As they continued to develop or at least to he more 
known daring the present period, and as their influence and importance 
are considerable for history, we take here again the subject from the begin- 
ning, in order to enumerate the various points it concerns, although the 
evidence about them is not strictly in chronological order. It belongs 
however to the same period. 

182. We may notice among other innovations: 
— A state sacrifice every year at the vernal equinox for the renewal of fire; 
""so all fires had to be extinguished for three days previously and food ta- 
ken cold. The rule was established for the first time in Tsin (Shan3i)55i 
by the Marquess Wen (636-627 b.c.) who had taken as a wife Ki-Wei, 
one of the chief's daughters of tlie Non-Chinese barbarians Tsiang Kiu 
iu." *2 

— A new worship of a deity of Fire named Hwei-luh, and of a deitj- of 
Water named Hluen Ming, previously mentioned § 106. We hear of it 
in 524 in TcKeng (S. Honan) once only, as if it was but a local affair, 
but it seems connected with the pyrolatric views mentioned earlier, nota- 
bly in 564, 541, and 533, in the state of Sung (E. Honan) which as we 
know was in close relation with the foreigners of Lang-yaand Tsih-Moh.^ss 
— A female and male character attributed respectively to fire and water, 
which are distinctly stated, the fire to be the fei or wife of water, and the 
water to be the mon or husband of fire, in 533 and 525 b.c.^^i 
f\ 1-S;;. The worshi[i of the Fire Goddess Hwei'luh is highly interesting, 
because transformed by the ancestral and euhemeristic prejudices of the 
Chinese it has become the worship of the Spirit of the Hearth, the 
household Fire-god, commonly called the Kitchen-god^55_ Jt ^as sacri- 
ficed for the first time by Hia Fu-tclii Keeper of the Ancestral temple 
of the state of Lu, about 600 b.c, who burnt in his honour, and right in 
the teeth of sacrificial orders' a pile of fire-wood. Confucius whose opin- 
ion was asked in after times on the matter disapproved that mode of 
sacrificing in that occasion, 'at present, said he, that sacrifice is paid to 
a wife of old time ; the materials for it might be contained in a tub, and 
the (ritual) vase is tlie common wine-jar'^^'' .' A popular saying quoted 
in the Lun-yil : ' It is better to pay court to the kitchen fire tlian to 
the south-west corner" ^7^' shows that this worship was not yet an ancient 
institution at the time of Confucius. As a fact it was then worshipped 
only in some parts of the land ; in 533 it existed in Honan E.^^s^ and 
in the third century i;.c., it was also flourishing in Kiang-su and in 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. "t&S- 

Shansi^^^. It assumed gradually a more and more importa nt position 
in the popular religion of the country, and was adopted by the Emperor 
himself under the Han dynasty (133 e.g.)^**^ ; at present it has becoma 
the most extensively vrorshipped divinity of China. The various names 
given to it show the successive and different aspects under which it 
was considered. That of Hwei-luh, its historical antecedent which 
has been already described, was shortened into the name of Wei^^^, 
from that of Ki Wei, the Chinese lady of barbarian birth, wife of the 
Duke Wen of Tsin in 636-627 b.c, doubtless because her husband 
had made some innovations in the annual ceremony of the renewal 
of fire, as noticed § 182. Another denomination used in the IVth 
cent. B.C., for Ki Wei, was Ki which is the tuft or coiffure of a Chinese 
lady ; the deity was then represented as a beautiful woman dressed in 
red*^'^. Her worship as that of the First Cook, Si en tch'uet, was recog- 
nized as a regional one in Tsin, i.e. North half of Shansi, by Kao-tsu, 
the first Emperor of the Han dynasty in 206 b.c.^^^. The names of 
Tsuan shin, ' Spirit of the furnace, ' and of Tsao shin, ' Spirit of the 
hearth ' were and have remained the most common namei of that divin- 
ity^^*. Its female character was generally acknowledged and remained 
undisputed until the second century of our era, when it passed to the 
stronger sex^^*. 

Notes 

650) Fire was looked upon since early times among the Chinese as a 
great purifier, and large state fires were kindled at the beginning of 
each season to ward off the evil influences of the incoming period. Spe- 
cial wood fuel was selected for that object. The management of these 
fires was in the hands of a Director of Fire. The first appointment of 
the kind dates from the reign of Ti Kuh Kao Sin, the fourth ruler of 
the Bak Sings in China (2160-2085 b.c). It was given to Tchung- 
Zj, who thus became Tchuh-Yung; but sent by his master against Kwan, 
intendant of public works ( Kung Kung) who was disobedient, he was 
unsuccessful and fell into disgrace. 

651) Cf. Si King tsa ki by Liu-hin (Han dyn.) — Yeh tchung ki by Luh- 

hwei (Tsin dvn.) — King Tsu siiy she ki by Ts'ung-lin (6th cent.) 

T.P. 31, 2-3.— De Groot, Fetes d Emouy, I. 212, 

652) The Tsiang Kiuju, 2572-1213-1852 Bas ; the first word also writ- 
ten 2196 or 5619 Bas.) are mentioned in the Tso tchuen in 637, and in 
the Tchun tsiu in 583 B.C. {Ch. CL, V., 186, 351, 363). The race 
they belonged to is not known although they were settled on the pre- 
sent frontiers of Shansi and Shantung. They have been reckoned as 
a tribe of the Red Tih or Teks (Legge, Ch. CI, V., prol. 127 ; Plath. 
Fremde barbarische Stdmme im alien China, 463 ; on the Teks, cf. T. de 
L., Languages of China before the Chinese, 167) because they were in 
proximity with the latter, but as they were attacked by them in 637, it 



/6X 

"iW ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

seems to me very doubtful that they should belong to the same race. 

They were finally dispersed in 58S by the states of TsiN and Wei, at 

iho same time as the remnants of the Red Teks. 
C53) Cf. Tso tchuen under these various years, and 5, xxix,, 1-5. 
654) Fei, 1853 Bas. — Mou, 56 17 Bas, — Tso tchuen, 10, ix, 3 ; xvii. 5. 
G55) At present, there are two objects of worship, as the Chinese aver, 

to be found in every family, viz. the Ancestral tablet and the kitchen 

god.' J. Doob'ttle, Social life of tlie Chinese, 186S, p. 417. 

656) Cf, Li Ki, VIII, i, 23 ; Legge's translation, vol. I, p. 403-4.— 
The expression used is Ngao shin (Bas. 1834-1025) litt. spirit of the 
South-west corner (of the house) which commentators say is there 
equivalent to Tsuan shin (Bas. 5688-1025) 'Spirit of the hearth,' Cf, 
Khang-hi tze tien, s.v. Ngao. — In Ancient Chinese houses the door 
was always on the South-west side, as stated in the Shi king, II, iv. 
Ode 5. Se Kan, and the Ngao was inside, next to it. — At present the 
bouses are so planned as to face southwards or at least to have their 
chief entrance on the south. Cf, Dr. C, A, Gordon, Remarks on cer- 
tain points relating to imhlic health in China, p. 9, and Dr. John 
Dudgeon, Diet, dress, and dwellings of the Chinese, p, 200 (London, 
18S5). 

657) Lun yil, III, xiii. 1 ; ch. cl., I, 23, The famous philosopher Tchu- 
hi has remarked on this subject ; ' The kitchen-fire was comparatively 
a mean place, but when the spirit of it was sacrificed to, then the rank 
of the two places was changed for the time, and the proverb was in 
vogue.' — Sign Carlo I uini, Le Culte desgenies tutelaires, 1, § 1, thinks 
that it refers to a preference of sacrifice ' a I'Esprit du Foyer plutot 
qu' aux lares domestiques,' But this is stretching too far the meaning 
of the Chinese text. 

658) This is shown by the name of a man from Tcheng, called P'j Tsao-, 
i.e, attending the kitchen god, spoken of in the Tso tchuen, 10, ix, 3. 

659) Szema Tsien, She Ki, kiv, 28, f. 17 v.—Lii she Tchun «sm.— Gloss 
to Shan hai king, XVI, 5 v. — The name of Hwui-luh was that given 
to the deity in Wu as stated by Lu Pu-wei. 

660) Szema Tsien, K, 28, f. 23 v, 

661) Wei, 11832 B., 'hill-ghost'.— A7 TF^?, 2072-11832 B,—Cf. Yu 
Yang tsah tsu, hj Twan sheng shih, rf. 863 a.d. — T.P. 186,4, — 
Tso tchuen, Duke Hi, 1:3rd year ; Ch. CL V., 186, 191, and prol, 127. 
— Sha?^ hai king, ii., 21 ; vii,, 2 ; xvi,, 5, 

662) AV, 12683 B Tchirar/g t:e,xix. — Tze tien, s,v. ki, 190-1-6, fol, 49. 

663) Sien tch'uei, 5S0-5399 B. Szema Tsien, She Ki, kiv. 23, f. 17 v. 

664) Tsuan shin, 6588-7025 B. — Tsao shin, 7352-7025 B. 

665) Tcheng hiuen (127-200 a.d.) was I think the first who challenged 
the female character of the deitv, and who put forward the view that 
the kitchen god was no other than the Director of Fires of Antiquity, 
the Tchuh hiung of the reign of Ti kuh Kao sin, the fourth of the first 
rulers. — He was followed in his views by several scholars who attempted 
to establish a connection between the Fire god of the hearth, and one 
or other of the early fire-makers, Sui-jen, Shen-nung, or HAvang-ti. 
And the deity in question became a god whose worship absorbed that 
of a god of fate Se-ming. How this has come to pass is still an open 
question which Dr. J. J. de Groot, Les Fetes a Emouy, pp. 449 sq,, 



CHINESE CIVILISATrON. "t&f- 

579 sq. has not solved . — In some parts of China the Kitchen god is 
male and female. For instance at Fuhtchou the Chau Kung, * Prince 
of the Hearth,' and Chau Ma, ' Mother of the Hearth are worshipped 
together. The ideographic s])elling of Tsao in Ts(xo shin has given 
rise to a curious case of Mythography. This Tsao (7352 B.) in the 
tchuen style of writing just anterior but one to the present, is composed of 
three symbols meaning ' the Cave's red toad ;' the popular belief has 
made it a wife of the house cricket {Chou Ma). Cf. Baldwin-Maclay, 
Diet. Foochow dialect, pp. 3G, 100 ; Wells WiUiams, Syllab. Diet., 
p. 95*. 



Chap. VII. —Fifth Period : 481-22 1 b.c. 
Sect. B. Influences by the North-East. 

Innovations concerning Fire, 

184, Among other innovations concerning fire introduced through the 
Sea trade of Shantung, let us describe : 

— The peculiar notion of five sorts of fire. They are enumerated in full, 
for the first time by Sun-Wu^ee of T'si, who became a commander in the 
service of Hoh-liu, prince of Wu (514-495 b.c), and is the author of 
the famous treatise on the Art of war. Ping f ah, which has been preser- 
ved entire to the present time. Herewith his statement : 

All fires classified are five in number : 
the first is the ho jen^^'' or 'fire in man' ; 
the second is the ho tsih or 'fire accumulating' ; 
the third is the ho tche or 'fire which travels' (the lightning) ; 
the fourth is the ho k'u or 'fire in store' ; 
tlie fifth is the ho sui or 'fire in the wooden fire-drill'. 

The resemblance between this list'' "^ and that of the five fires in the 
Zend-Avesta is so close, so nearly identical, as shown in the note°<^^ be- 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 165 

low, that Siin-Wu must have been made acquainted with some IMazdean 
views in his native land which was in close relationahip with the foreign 
tea-traders of Sliantung. 

185. — A. remarkable superstition connected with metallurgy^'^ which is 
recorded about 500 b.c. is perhaps another innovation due to the same 
source . 

*Kan-tsiang, a man of Wu (Kiang-su) was, like Ngou-ye of Yueh^^' 
a master in tlie art of making swords. Having once presented a sword 
to the King Hoh-liii (514-494 b.c.),"^^ he was commissioned to make 
two others which were called Kan-tsiang and Moh-ya^''^. Kan-tsiang had 
collected, to make these swords, the best ores from five mines whicl) he 
mix3d together with the addition of some fruitless blossoms, in order 1 ^at 
the Yii and Tang, the breath of Heaven and Earth, should unite in ^he 
operation, but tlie essence of the Gold and Iron did not flow. ]\Ioh-)"k^^'' 
then said : ' A child should please to make the swords.' The Kmg 
hearing this sent his son who worked at the swords for three years with- 
out success. Kan-tsiang then remarked : 'I do not understand his deport- 
ment.' Answered Moli-ya; 'for the transformation of human and spiri- 
tual things, a human being is necessary and then perfection will be 
obtained ; at present the workmen make swords and find them not 
suitable, let them get a human being and their work will be perfect.' 
Kan-tsiang said : ' Formerly, in the foundry work of my master, the 
force of gold and iron was not exhausted, man and wife together did not 
enter the blast-furnace.' Moh-ya then added : ' the ancient masters them- 
selves melted away their own bodies to get perfection in their work, as 
sacrificing a concubine would only result in sending down calamities '^'''.' 
On this Kan-tsiang and his wife cut off their hair and nails and threw 
them with a child^''*' in the blasting furnace.' — The story goes on to state 
how the most complete success crowned the operation, and how the two 
swords were presented to the king^^^. 

Moh-ya, whose name is perhaps Indian, in this story has all the ap- 
pearance of a foreigner who suggests the necessity of a human sacrifice 
in the furnace for success^^*^. instead of the elaborate arrangements which 
had been previously taken by Kan-tsiang, according to the geomantic 
views of the Ancient Chinese. 

186. — The West Asiatic process of making fire by a concentration of 
the Sun rays with a concave metallic mirror was also introduced in China 
in the fifth century. It was not yet used in 617 nor in 5U6 b.c, as 
shown by statements of the Tso tchuen under these dates^^^, and Confn- 



166 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

cius knew notliing of it^^^.. ^^j ^i^^. Tchuii-li, cli. 37, 1. 27, mentions the 
implement under a foreign nauie'^^^, fu, it must liave been introduced 
little after the time of the great sage, and as it is mixed up with one of 
these wonderful notions^^^, which are connected with their influence in 
Shantung, tiie sea traders of Langga must have imported it from the 
West through the Indian Oie.in^^^. In the second century B.C., when 
the Li ki was edited, the metal tire-implement, or Kin-sin as it was then 
called, had become a household utensil of general use, which was hung 
at the girdle'^^s. The older system, the sui or fire-drill, which had been 
imported by the Bak families^^^ remained in use, until its supplanting 
by the flint-process^**^ (Jmo-l-wan) M'hich was well known to the Jews 
who went to China in the first century'^'^^. 

Notes — — 

66G) The subdivision of Fire was carried further in the Avesta than in 
the Veda. In the Veda we can distinguish three fires, sometimes called 
Agni nirmathya, fire obtained by rubbing, Agni aushasya, 
fire rising with the dawn, solar fire, and Agni vaidyuta, the fire 
of lightning. In the Avesta (Yasna XYII) we meet with five fires. 
Cf. Max Midler, Physical Rehgion, 1891, p. 229. 

GG7) On Sun Wu, commonly called Sun Tze, cf. Szema Tsien, Kiv. 65, 
fol. 1-2,- Kiv. ?)l, fol. 13, who praises his work. — The really oldest 
vi^ork uf this military class which has reached us entire, is that treatise on 
military tactics in 13 sections by Sun Wu, during the 6th cent. b.c. 
A. Wvlie, Notes on Chinese Literature, p. 72. — Mayers, Chinese R.M,, 
I., 635. 

66S) Ping fall, Kiv. \2. — Tchou Ts'ln sliih f/h t:e, Sun-tze, fol. 20 (edit. 
Hwang Hai-ngan). — Tai pincf ijil Ian, Kiv. 869, f. 5 r. 

669) I/nje,i, 53^81-91 'B-as.—Ho tsih, 5381-7236 Bas.— //o tche, 5381- 
6181 Bas.; the last syuibol is sometimes written 6187, and at first 
1090'S Bas. with the meaning of travelling. — Ho k'li 5381- 25-4 Bas. 
— Ho Sui, 56Sl-5")52 Bas.; the latter symbol is sometimes written 
11822 Bas. 

670) The notion is entirely un-Chinese. In the Tso t litwn in the years 
593, 564, 5i5, 533, and 521 we bear ^.nly of a distinction between the 
human fire called Ho-jen and the fire from heaven, ho tsai, 5381-5393 
Bas., i.e. the fire calamity.- — -The five fires have not received a place in 
the numeral categories of the Li Ki, and have remained a foreign and 
temporary notion. 

671) Cf. the Avestic Vohi(-jri/aria, the good and friendly fire tliat dwells 
in the bodies of mnn and beasts, witii the ho-je?}, t];e fire in man ; — 
the Avestic Spe'in'shta, the bountiful, increasing fire, with the /lo-tsih, 
the fire accumulating ; — the Avestic \^a:ishia, the most active lire, or 
fire of liglitniiig, with the ho ^c/^^', the fire which travels, or of lightning ; 
— the Avestic Berezisaruuli, the fire highly useful or tliat of tlie 
earth, with the h<> ISu, the fire in store. — the Avestic Urrdzishta, the 
fire in ihe plants, kindhd by friction, with the Ho svi, tlie fire in the 
Wooden isniterebrator.— Cf. Zend-Avesta, Vafna xvii. — C. de Harlez, 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 167 

Introduction u f hltade de V Avei^tn et de la Religion Mazde'eww, p- 
xcvii. — L. H. Mills, 7%e Zend-Avesta, part 111, p. 258 ; Oxford, 
]S87. — James Darmesteter, Le Zend-Aresta, vol. I, pp. 140-150; 
Paris, 1 92. 

672) We have previously pointed out that tlio art of tempering iron had 
been introduced into China by these foreign traders about or before 
S-iO I5.C. A local legend near the gulf of K'ao-tchou attributed a 
speeial virtue for this operation to the water of a river near the set- 
tlement of their leader Kut-lu in G81. Cf. supra § 103-104. 

673) His swords were famous, as shown by the following extract from 
Tchioang-tze, xv, ;•> : Now he who possesses a sword nunle at Yueh 
preserves it carefully in a box and does not dare to use it, it is con- 
sidered the perfection of valuable swords. 

674) Ilop-Uil, 11718-11G91, or 1171S-2577 Bas. 

675) Kan-t$iang, 2470-2196 Bas. — Moh-ija, 8975-8341, also written 
11552-11393 or 1155-'-li470 Bas. 

07 G) A version of the story says that "Moli-ya was the wife of Kan- 
tsiang, but the narrative seems to show the contrary. And the two 
Chinese symbol perhaps conceal an Indian word sucli as Maha, great 

677) Tchwang tze, VI, 10 makes probably an allusion to the hurnan. 
sacrifice recorded here in the following passage : Here was a well- 
known caster of metals, in whose crucible the molten_metal bubbled and 
sptirted up, saying: I am destined to be made into the Moh-ya sword. 

67?) One version says 'a girl,' another 'a boy.' 

679) ]Vic Yueh tchun tsiu T. P. 843, 2. — Of. also J'lmg Tclioa Lieh 

kivoh tclii, kiv, 74, — A similar story is told about the casting of the 
great bell at Peking in the 4th year Yung-loh or 1406. An officer 
named Kwan-yu commissioned with the operation had failed twice in 
the attempt. His daughter Ko-ngai, then 16 years old, hearing from 
a soothsayer that the metals would not melt in the third attempt un- 
less the blood of a virgin be mixed in the alloy, threw herself in the 
furnace to secure the success of her father, and the bell was happily 
cast. Cf. La Fiete Jiiude en Chine, by Dabry de Thiersant, lb77, p. 
217-219.— N. B. Dennys, The Folklore of China, p. 133. 

680) As many superstitions of ancient times have been found to be con- 
nected with some crude notions suggested by experience, is it not 
possible that there shoidd be under tliis a vague idea of cementation 
of the metal. It was an old ])ractice with the founders to throw horns 
and bones in their melting furnaces. 

6il) In 617, at a great hunt organised by the Duke of Sung and the 
Earl <if Tch'eng, every one is instructed to take his sui or fiie- drill. 
In 50G, the King of ts'u orders his riien to take their sui or fire-drill 
and to light torches at the tails of the elephants which are sent for- 
ward against the army of Wu. ( f. Tso tchtien, 6, x, 7 ; li, iv, 15. 

682) Lun yu, xvii, 21, 3. He speaks only of the boring-wood im- 
plement. 

683) It was called _/■«, variously written (Bas. 1800) in the Tchou-li, and 
(Bas. 7429) elsewliere, cf. T.l .Y.L. 7I7, 3 r. The translation ' Mir- 
oir Male' proposed by G. Sch.legel, Uranographie Chinese, p. 612, 
is therefore not acceptable. 

684) Tliere were two mirrors; one to receive the Y^ing or heat from the 



168 ORIGIN OF THE TAULY 

sun, the other to receive dew or water or Yn from the moon for the 
sacrifices. Cf. Tchoii-U kiv. 37, 1. 27.— T.P.Y.L., A'/>. ^63, f. 2; kiv. 
869. f. 8. 

G85) I am not aware of the date of the invention in tlie west, and 1 am 
not sure that it was unknown in Babylonia. Cf. the compound ideo- 
gram sun +Ji7-e + enlai-f/e. (AV.A.I. II, 27, 51 a ; Brunn. 7804). — 
They were known to the Greeks. 

G86) Cf. Li ki, 10, I, 2, 3.— Another name for it was yang-sui, or so- 
lar fire-implement, wliich has been used instead of the older fii-stii . 

687) Cf. supra § IS note 60. — Tlie oldest forms of the symbol sui sug- 
gest its object, tlie fire-stick and drill, as it was ideographically com- 
posed of a pointed stick -\- to f/o. Cf. Min Tsi kih, Lull situ tung, kiv. 
VII, f. 47. — The Chinese term represents the Babylonian sarul, fire- 
stick (Brunn. 1652) on which cf. A. H. Sayce, Eel. Arte. Bab. 
p. 181. 

688) The various processes of making fire were by P): Gyration of fire- 
stick by bow-drill or pump-drill : :J") Friction of Avood sticks by 
sawing or plowing ; 3*^) Percussion of flint, jiyrites and steel, 
4*^) Concentration of solar Rays by a concave mirror or a lense ; 
5") Condensation, as by the fire-syringe. — On the three first pro- 
cesses cf. the excellent paper of Mr. Walter Hough, Fire-making 
apparatus in the U.S. National Museum, pp. ^oi-b'il of llie Smith- 
sonian report of the U.S.A. IMuseum, for 188S. — The fire-syringe or 
hesiapi of the Sari bus- Dayaks of Bm-neo, and of the Kachins of Upper 
Burma. — The fricf'on process by sawing which was and is perhaps 
still known to the Pre-Chinese populations of China, was described by 
Tclnvang-tze in the IVth cent. b.c. Cf. J\F.Y.L., kiv. 869, f. 2.— 
The fire-drill seems me to have been known to the Ancient Ilgyptians ; 
in Paul Pierret, Vocahulaire Ilieroghiphiqne, on 30 words for fire, six 
are written with the determinative spt, flam e, while twenty two are 
written with the determinative ua wliicli is said to represent a sorb of 
cord, like a fishing line. Cf. B.&O.R. Aug. 1892. pp. 42-43, my 
note on fire making in Ancient Egi/pt. 

689) Cf. on the arrival of the Jews in China, H. Cordier, Les Juifs en 
Chine (L'anthropologie, Sept.-Oct., 1890, p. 547-551), and T. de L. 
Oil the Entrance of the Jews into China during the first century of our 
era : B.&O.R., June 1891, vol. V, p. 131-134.— They knew to produce 
fire by striking steel against flint (2 Mace. X, 3). Cf. C. P. Keil, 
Manual of Biblical Archoeology, 1888, vol. II, p. 126. 

Other Innoi'atlons. 
187. — Lieh-tze^^'' and Tchwang-tze^^^ of the fourth century b.c, in 
their teachings, have often given vent to sailors' yarns learnt from the 
foreign sea-traders of the Shantung coast. For instance we may refer 
amongst others to : 

— the myth of the storm-bird'-^-, which they called p\'ng^^^ ; — when this 
ird rouses itself and flies, its wings are like clouds all round the sky. — 

In tlie dark and vast Ocean, the Pool of Heaven, on a whirlwind it 

mounts upwards, it bears on its back the blue sky, and then it shapes 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 169 

its course for the south, and proceeds to the Ocean there^^^." This ig 

clearly a storm myth in its inception, and perhaps the oldest version of 
the mythological statement which has become the Rukh of the Arabs, the 
Gryphon of Marco-Polo, the Garuda of the Hindus, the Simurgh of the 
Old Persians, the Bahr Yukhre of the Rabbinical legends, the Gryps of 
the Greeks, &c/^5. 
— a fabulous notion of the whale® ^^ ; 

188. — An innovation which dates from the same time is the habit of 
writing on skins which is, and always was, not Chinese. It began to be 
practiced in the state of sung and remained a local i^eculiarity^^?^ 

189. — An acquaintance with a religious imagery such as could only be 
known in the emporia of the Erythrsean sea**^^. The fabulous fishmen 
civilisers and writing carriers of the legends of Babylonia, the philacteries 
of Egypt, and some figures of Hindu gods were brought to this knowledge, 
and were made use of by the Taoszeists dealers-in-the-marvellous, when 
they amplified the ancient Chinese traditions. , This acquaintance which 
had begun towards the end of the last period, was largely increased in 
the fifth and fourth centuries, and stamped henceforth many of the le- 
gends and fabulous reports which they compiled. 

The creatures half-fish_half-men who springing out of the water, 
brought successively written tablets to Hwang-ti, Yao, Shun, Yii, Tcheng 
T'ang, Wu Wang and Tcheng Wang, as stated in the glosses, not in 
ihe text, of the Annals of the Bamboo Books, are an echo of the first 
named of these Western notions^^^. Such is also the notion of 

the mythological hippo-centaurs. Lieh-tze'*^'^ speaks of Fuh-hi, Ifu 
Kwa, Shennung and Hia Hou (i.e. the Great Yii) has having bodies of 
serpents, human faces, heads of oxen and muzzles of tigers, although 
they had all the virtues of Saints. This conception hitherto unknown 
in Chinese literature is undoubtedly Egypto-Indian in character. 

190. — Interpolations made in the five first books of the Sha7i hat king, 
and the thirteen subsequent books which with some later exceptions, 
belong to the period we are now studying; numerous descriptions are 
made of demi-gods and ge^ii special to the regions described''o^. The 
most common types are those with_or withoutanimal li_mbs, either hold- 
ing serpents_in their hands, or having serpents for earrings, and tread- 
ing on or driven by two dragons or two serpents. Now we cannot take 
these deities as those actually worshipped in their respective countries 
indicated, but as those which the travellers were induced to venerate in 
order to be preserved from the spirits and evils of the land. They are 



170 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

in many cases almost so identical with Egyptian phylacteries'^^ and Hin" 
du figures''^ 5 of deities, that the compilers of the Romantic geography we 
are speaking of, cannot but have seen pictures of these phylacteries and 
figures when they wrote their descriptions. Perhaps that the Shantung 
traders were not the sole channel through which the latter views have 
reached the Chinese states, and that some of them came in by the South- 
west and through the Semi-Chinese state of ts'uJ^* 

Notes 

690) On Lieh-tze, cf. Note 627. — He was contemporary of Tze Yang 
who was prime minister in tcheng. Cf. Tchwang-tie, xxviii, 4. 

691) Tchwang-Tchou or Tchwang-tze was a native of the state of wei 
also called Liang from its capital city (after 361 B.C.). He was born 
at Weng i once near Kwei teh, E. Honan), and was flourishing under 
the reigns of Kings Hwei of Liang (370-361-334 B.C.) and Siuen of 
Ts'i (332-313 B.C.). He declined the offers of King Wei of Ts'w (339- 
338 B.C.). Cf. Szema Tsien, kiv. 64, fol. 3 v.— He is said to have 
lived in 368-319 B.C. — On the translations of his works, cf, supra, 
N. 628. 

692) Lieh-tze, V, 3. — Tchwang-tze, I, 1. — Lieh-tze quotes it in his al- 
leged dialogues between two imaginary individuals, in one of which 
called Yn Tang, some wanted to recognize Tcheng T'ang, the founder 
of the Shang dynasty, because the latter's name was changed into Yn 
when it was transferred there under the reign of Pan-keng nearly 400 
years later,— Tchwang-tze quotes from "a book called I's'i Hiai^ i.e. 
Talks of Ts'i (13239-10857 Bas.) which treated of strange and mar- 
vellous things," where all these sailors' tales seem to have been col- 
lected. Quotations from this work appear in the Tai ping yil Ian cyclo- 
pedia of A.D. 983, as if it was yet in existence. Cf. Kiv. 825, f. 4u, 

693) Bas. 12952. Cf. also W. F. Mayers, Camese E.M., p. 174. 

694) Cf. the translation in J. Legge, Texte of Taoism, I, 164-167 ; S. 
B.E. xxxix. 

695) My lamented friend Sir Henry Yule, has paid a particular atten- 
tion to this myth, and to the partial support it may have received in 
the middle ages from the past existence of enormous birds such as the 
^pi/or7us of Madagascar, the Harpagornis of New-Zealand, and the 
would be wings of the same represented by the immensely long mid- 
rib of the rqfia palm, sent as such by traders of the Indian Ocean. 
Cf. The Book of Ser Marco Polo, ed. 2, vol. II, p. 40.^-414, 552 ; A 
glossary of Anglo-Indian ivords, p. 578-579.— CL also, L. C. Casar- 
telli, Cyena-Sifnurgh-Iioc, un chapitre d'evolution mythologiqtic etphil- 
ologique, 14 pp. Paris, Picard, 1891 ; and the correspondence in the 
Academy, on The Garuda and the famous giant-hirds, reproduced in 
the J.R.A.S., xxiii, 344-6. 

696) Called Kwun (Bas. 12827) in Tchwang-tze who supposes that the 
peng comes from its transformation, Ix., while its real name is K\ng 
(Bas. 12828). It may have been known some time earlier if the latter 
symbol in the Tso tcMien 7, XII, i.e. in 597 B.C. had the same mean- 
ing, although employed there in a figurative sense. Cf. T.P.Y.L,, 



CHINESE CIVILISATrON. 171 

kiv. 938, f. 1. 

697) Cf. rsienHan Shu, kiv. 30. — Let U3 recall here the Diphtherai 
Basilikai or Royal Archives of Persia, and the tradition that the writ- 
ings of Zoroaster were preserved on cow's skins. 

69?) In the cosniogonic speculations of Babylonia, the first beings were 
chaotic creatures in which were combined the limbs of every species of 
animals. Cf. Berosus, in Euseb. Chronic, i, 4. — In Egypt the anj- - 
mal worship was officially established by Ka Kou, the second king of / 
the second dynasty, following Manetho; and the figures ^of gods as 
half aninials are supposed to have come later. Cf. A. H. Say'oe, Her- 
odotus, p. 262, 364. — G. Maspero, Bisto re Aiicienne,^.2^; Reriiedes 
Religions, 1880. — F. Lenormant, Histoire Ancienne, t. III., p. 211. 
— As to the Egyptian worship of animals cf. A. Wiedemann, Le Culte 
des Animaux en Egypt: LeMuseon, 1S89, pp. 211-225 and 309-318, 
torn. viii. 

699) I have reprodced the Western and the Chinese statements in my 
paper on The fabulous fishmen of Early Babylonia in Ancient Chinese I 
documents, 6 pp.; B. & 0. R., Sept. 1888. Cf. also my note on the 
Centaurs and Hippocentaurs of Western and Eastern Asia, B. & O. 
R., YI, 167-168. 

700) Lieh tze, Kiv, II. Cf my paper on The Deluge tradition and its 
remains in Ancient China, note 60. 

701) The purpose of the descriptions of countries, such for instance as 
those inscribed on the ancient vases which were supposed to have been 
reproduced in the Shan hat King, was to enable the traveller to avoid 
any injury. Cf. Tso tchuen, 7, iii., 4, 

702) Cf. for instance the Egyptian phylactery of Hor on the crocodiles, 
in the British Museum, engraved in F. li^xioxm&ni, HiStoire Ancienne, 
torn. III. p. 133. 

703) Cf. Edwd. Moore, Hindu Pantheon, pi. 6, 16, 23, &c. 

704) In 548, according to the Tso-tchuen 9, xxv., 9, Wei Yen Grand 
Marshal of Ts'u, 'set about describing the difi'erent lands, measuring 
the forests ; defining the meres; marking out the higher lands and the 
downs; distinguishing the poor and salt tracts; enumerating the bound- 
aries of flooded districts ; &c..' Although this was done chiefly in TsVs 
interest, it may have been the ground work of a part of the Shan hat King. 



Innovations of Hindu Origin. 

191. — the worship of the Pah Shen'^^^ or Eight Demi-gods which are 
simply the Hindu Eight Vasus. It was established all over his state* 
probably if not before, by Tai Kung of Ts'i who ruled in 390-384 e.g.'** 
He was the founder of the Tien dynasty, the second one in Ts'i, and owed 
much to the foreign element of the sea-shore population of his state, which 
supported him as they had done his fathern in their encroachments 
against the regular authority of the lineage of princes founded in the Xlth 
century by Kiang Tai Kung whose last descendant was d eposed by him. 
This circumstance explains partly his adoption of the foreign \:orship of 



172 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

the Pah Shen, which it will be sufficient to enumerate in comparison with 
the Hindu Vasus to establish their identity and unquestionable deriva- 
tion. 

Eight Vasus (Hindu) Eight Sheng (Chinese) 

Dhruva, — Sky =: Heaven (Lord of), Tien Tchu 

Dhava, — Earth = Ea'th ,, T'i „ 

Dhanu, — Arcitenens = War „ Ping „ 

Pratyusha, — Dawn = Light ,, Yang ,, 

Prabhasha, — Twilight ^ Darkness „ Yn „ 

Soma, — ^Moon = Moon „ Yueh ., 

Anala, — Agni = Sun ,, Jeh ,, 

Anila, — Wind ^ 4 Seasons ,, Sze she 

The respective places of worship of each of these deities which are indi - 
cated by Szema Tsien are all within the limits of the state of Ts'i, and 
principally in the North of the Shantung peninsula.^**' The Hindu origin 
of these Demi-gods cannot be doubted. 

In India they are a class of semi-divine beings impersonations of nat- 
ural phenomena belonging to the Vaidic period ; they are alluded to bod- 
ily708 [^ the Eig Veda, and described individually in other works.^*^^ 

Notes 

705) Pah Shen, 611-6173 Bas. — These must be clearly distinguished from 
the Pah Sien or Eight worthies of Chinese legend and art. 

706) Szema Tsien, She ki, Kiv. 28, f. 10, recording tlat She Hwang ti 
offered sacrifices to the famous mountains, great rivers, and to the Pah 
shen, says that the latter "were acknowledged since antiquity, and that 
it was said also that they had been introduced by Tai Kung. The state 
of Ts'i (Bas. 13239) was so called because of the navel of Heaven, 
Tien ts'i (Bas. 1798-13239). The sacrifices had been interrupted, and 
I do not know when they were begun again." — The pun on the sound 
of Ts'i (Bas. 13239) Regulated, name of the state, with that of 
TsH (Bas. 8628) navel, (same character with det. flesh) because of a 
pool near the capital which was thus named, does not deserve criticism. 
As to the Tai Kung or Great Duke, the one referred to cannot be 
Kiang Tai Kung the founder of the state in 1091 e.g. (Rectified Chron- 
ology) who held no knowledge of such matters, and who is always called 
Kiang Tai Kung in history ; while the other Tai Kung Ho, also a 
founder oi dynasty (the second) is certainly the one referred to, although 
the author does not speak positively on the point. 

707) As the authority of the Princes of Ts'i was not estabhshed there 
before the middle of the sixth century, the cult of the eight gods in 
Ts'i, could be but of a later date. 

708) Rig Veda,^., 98, l.—Atharva Veda, XVIIL, 2, A%.—Satapatha 
Brahmana, IV, 5; 7: 2.— Trsl. Julius Eggeling, II., 411; S.B.E. 
XXVI.— 

709) Vishnu Purana, trsl. Wilson, p. 120.— iVa^a, trsl. Monnier- Williams, 
p. 215. — Bhagavad Gita, -p. 145. — Mahd Bharata, Adi Parva, xcix.. 
p. 295-297, trsl. Pratapa Chandra Ray. 




CHINESE CIVILISATION. 173 

192. — A monster god of the North, called Yil-Kiang,''^^ i.e. Kiang of 
the remote corner, also called: Kiang -liang,^^^ which was represented 
with tlie face ot a man the boily of a bird; as earrings it has green serpents, 
and it treads on two other similar animals.' ^^ Its description vouchsafes 
its Hindu origin. ^^^^ 

193. — A notion of thirty three superior beings, as in the Rig Veda,^!* 
and the Avesta.'^^ They were in India deities of the Sky, the Earth, and 
the Waters, eleven for each.'^'' The result was that when the Chinese 
compiled their information about the fabulous period, and found amongst 
their earliest relics, statements concerning the existence of thirteen and 
eleven Kings or periods of 18000 years each, according to astrologico-cos- 
niogonic calculations once made in Babylonia and which they could not 
understand,"^' they were by this later notion led to add nine more Kings. 
or periods of 18000 years each, which as a computation of years, clash 
with all the other calculations and have no ralson cVetre. But the number 
of thirtrj three primitive beings was thus secured and took its place in their 
cosmogony. 

194. — Notions of Hindu cosmogony and cosmography, such as the 
avatar of the tortoise, the Sumeru, and the Soma. Lieh-tze (c. 400 b.c.) 
seems to be the oldest Taoszeist who has combined Hindu ideas and 
conceptions learned from the for"eigners of Shantung with legends long 
before in possession of the ancient Chinese. In my special paper on The 
Dchtge-tradition, I have pointed out the influence of the avatar of the c 
tortoise on the flood legend which the Chinese had preserved'^*, and 
therefore it is needless to say here'^^ anything more on the s\ibject. 

The wonderful fancies of the Hindu poetical descriptions of the imag_ 
inary Sumeru and its four rivers were applied to the scarcely less imag- 
inary Kwen-lun of the West of China ; and the scraps of positive know- 
ledge about it, with the few traditions preserved about the expeditions of 
TCHou Muh Wang outside the W. borders in the Xth century^'^o, served 
as a peg for all sorts of wonderful accounts, due for the greatest parts to 
the immediate disciples of Lieh-tze,'-^ 

The Soma, Chinese Tze-mai"^^^ is the plant and elixir of immortality, — 
food of the Sten or Richis, which is spoken of in the fabulous reports 
of the Five islands of the Genii {suprd § 122-1-6). " 

195. — By his adaptation of Hindu thoughts on Cosmogony and Cos- 
mology, Tsou-hion (c, 378-300 b.c.) whom we have already mentioned, 
has exercised a great influence on Taoszeism'-'. He began to teach to- 
wards the end of the reign of King Wei of Ts'i (d. 831 b.c.) And un- 



174 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

derthat of his successor Siuen (33i'-831 b.c.) He wrote first a very large 
work on supreme holiness'^^*, and later on when established in the Kieh 
shi'h palace, in yen, he composed his treatise on the cliief evolution of 
the Yn and Yang'^^. He explained that by the influence of the Five 
elements'^^ the world was formed, and proceeding from smaller things to 
greater things, he described a scheme of cosmogony similar to tlie Sak- 
wala of the Hindus. 

196.— The seventh year (i.e. 305 B.C.) of King Tchao of yen, the 
protector of Tsou-hien (§ 173 supra.) saw the arrival of a man professing 
the doctrines of Tan(?), and called Shc-lo''-'. His name recallss the Sans- 
krit Sila, moral purity, usually transcribed by the same symbol^^^. He 
said that he was 130 years old, and that he had come from the country 
of Muk-tu'''^^ or Ma gad ha, also known as Shen-tu''^^ or India, which 
he had left five years previottsly. He performed numerous magical tricks* 
one of which is descrihed in the traditional report of the event'^'^. 

Notliing is said of the route which the Indian Monk had followed ; it 
may have been through the South-west, as we shall see further on that 
certain circumstances susrcrest that relaticuis with Burma and India be- 
came active in the fotirth century. The arrival of Sila was certainly an 
important circumstance and he may have been the first of the iSramans 
whom we shall hear of in N.E. China at the beginning of the next 
period . 

Notes 

710) Yu Kiang: Bas. 7107-2646.— /i:/an(7 liang: Bas. 2(146-8-03. 

711) Shan Hai King, Kiv. 8 f. 4 v : Kiv. 17, f, 20.— It is mentioned in 
Tchwang-tze, VI. vi., 7, and in Lieh-tze, V. 2.— Khang-Jv tze licn s.v. 

712) An old authority says also that it was figured, the body, hands and 
feet black, riding on two dragons. Cf. Shan hal King, ibid, gloss. — 
These two descriptions are combined in its modern figure, where it is 
represented with its Iniman face and bird's body driving on two dragons. 
Cf. for instance the fig. 58 in Charles Gould, Muthical Monsters, p. i:41. 

713) It is not without some resemblance to Garuda, or perhaps to Kuvera. 

714) Rig-Veda, I. 34, 11 ; 139, 11 ; VIII, 35, 3 : IX. 92, 4.— Muir. 
Sanskrit texts, vol. IV, f. 9. — Max Muller, India, what can it. teach 
vs,Y>. 111-5. — Satapatha Brahmana, III, 5 ; 7 : 4 : transl. Eggeling, 
S,B.E. xxvi, p. 411. And in many other works such as th*^ Aitareya 
Brahmana, the Atharva Veda, the MahabharatH, the Rama}' ana, the 
Taithirya Sanhita, &c. 

715) Avesta, Yasna I. 10, the 33 rataras. — ^Transl. Mills, S.B.E. xxxi, 
p. 198.— M. Hang, Kssai/s, ed. West, p. 276.— 

716) The thirty-three gods have been carried by Buddhists in Central 
Asia. The Man-Han Si-fan tsyeh-yas, a Buddhist repertory in Sans- 
crit, Tibetan, Mandshu, Mongol and Chinese, tr. De Harlez, gives sect, 
xiv, 2 : 'frayastringa. The gronj) of tlie 33 gods ; 'I'ibetan, sum c'u 



CHINKSE CIVILISATION. 175 

gsum pit, id. ; Chin. Mandslm, the 33 lioavons (ahka) ; INIongoI, the 
33 tef.-in. — B.&O.R. IV, p. 1G8. — Cf. also J. G. Schmidt, Forsch- 
ungen in Gehitie der altered religicsen....der Volker Mittel-Afl/'ns, 1824. 
— C. de Harlez, La Religion Natsonale des Tartares Orientaux, 1889, 
p. 173. 

717) Cf. svpn:,v]\. IV, sect, d, 30, and notes 119-121. 

718) Cf. The Deluge legend, § 51, and note \'20.-B.kO.R. iv, 108-1U9. 

719) The sundering- of the earth, mentioned in the Chinese legend is re- 
ferred to in the Yh King, Kwa 11. 1. — The live dragons of the first Ki 
in the Ciiinese mythical list of Akkadian kings, are mentioned iii the 
same work, Kwa I. — These two references in the oldest hook of the 
Chinese wonld be sufficient by themselves to show the existence of 
ancient documents bearing on these subjects in early China and their 
introduction by the Bak families of Nai Hwang-ti. But there are 
some more proofs. The early Babylonian cosmogony quoted in tlie 
Ta te h king {siiprd, 133-137) is referred to in the same work: Kwa 
I, 1. — The legend of Nu-hwa repairing the rent in the heaven, was al- 
ready among the documents used for divination under the second ruler 
of the Hi'a dynasty as sliown by the Knei-tsang: 

720) Cf. supra, notes 165-1G9, § 92, note 347. 

721) /,(■. Tlie story of Muh, the Son of Heaven, J/w/i t'iev-tze-tchuen, 
is a most valuable relic of antiquity which has not received the attention 
it deserves. It has not the glowing of a {production of tlie Neo-taoist 
school, and contains a great deal of geographical lore, which it seems to 
me refers to a genuine journey to Khotan and Kashgaria. Dr. E. J. 
Eitel, who has translated it (China Review, 1889, XVII., 223-240, 
247-258^) "is convinced that the main po'tion of the narrative is of a 
very ancient date (10th cent. B.C.)," and I agree with him in that 
respect. I intend to make a special study of the work. 

722) Supra, notes 455, 458. 

723) His works are now lost, but they were still existing in the Im- 
perial library of the Han dynasty in b.c. 9. Cf. Liu h ang pieh luh. 
And an analysis of his views is given by Szema Tsien, She Ki, kiv. 
74, f. 2-3. 

724) Ta sheng tcht plen, in more than one hundred thousand words, 
Cf. She ki, kiv. 74, f. 2. 

725) Called Yn >jang tchu i/un, ' chief permutations of the Yn and Yang.' — 
Cf. supra, § 173. 

726) His views on the five elements were followed by Liu Hiang in the 
Wu heng tchi, and by Pan-ku in the Peh hu tung y, of the Han dy- 
nasty. He is believed to have annotated the Tchou-li. Cf. Mayers, 
Chinese R.M., i, 746 ; ii, 127. 

727) She-lo, 2230-8176 Bas. 

7?8) Eitel, Sanskrit Chinese dictionary, p. 127a. 

729) Jfuk-tu, mod. Muh-sii. 4880-8476 Bas. The old sounds are given 
by the Archaic dialects notably by the Sino-Annamite, the oldest of 
all, on which cf. B.&O.R. V, 24.' 

730) Shen-tu, 6173-4772 Bas. 

731^ 'One of his tricks consisted in causing a ten storied /ou-<'« or pa- 
goda, with images of people 5 or 6 inches long, walking and dancing 
round it, to grow out of the tip of his fingers. Cf. Shih y ki, kiv. 4, 
by Wang Kia of the fourth century. — Mr. Herbert J. Allen, Simi- 



17G ORIGIN OP THE EARLY CHINESE CIVILI3ATrON. 

laritii hetioeeii Buddhism and Early Taoism : China Review, 1886-7, 
Yol. XV, p. 97, was the first to translate this interesting statement. But 
the proposed identification of Miik-tu, with Magadha is mine. As to 
the trick described, 1 would suggest that it was an image seen through, 
a magnifying glass which Sila was holding in his hand. 



Northern Influence. 

197) Towards the middle of the fourth century a new and rather 
curious influence became apparent in the states of tchao in Shansi, and 
of YEN in N. Tchihli^^2_ WTg },jjyg gpgj^ ^i^^t the Neo-Taoists were 
flourishing in the latter Kingdom^^', North and West of these states 
S^ were the terit(jries of Lin-hu and Lou-fan belonging to the non-Chinese 
Wu-hwan who were the west branch of the Tung-hu, the eastern branch 
of whom were the Sien-pi or Coreans''^*, In the same region which in 
the sixth century formed the N. of the state of tsin, there was a famous 
breed of houses which it is reported in the Tse-tchven had never been 
taken advantage of for the benefit of the state. In 333, Su-Ts'in"** the 
famous statesman of tchou went to yen to enlist it in his league of the 
six states against the encroachments of ts'in, then aiming already at the 
Empire^^^. A result of his sojourn there was the organization of a body 
of 6000 horsemen, being the first cavalry which had ever existed in the 
Chinese states^^''. The first instance of horseriding astride had occurred 
nearly two centuries before, but lia^ never been put into practice for army 
purposes^^^. Wu-ling, the King of the aforesaid state of tchao, who 
ruled in 325 until 298 i$.c. conq\iered the Hu state of Lin-hu and Lou- 
fan, in 307 B.C. and introduced from there several new customs and 
habits. Horsemanship^'^ and archery were henceforth extensively prac- 
tised, contrily to former times, and the costume of the Hti people was 
adopted'''^. Amouir these innovations may be noticed that of the hue 
large leather boots to go on horseback, which are worn to the present 
day' 



,741 



Notes 

732) Supra, § 164. 

733) Supra, § 173 

734) Lin-hu. 4136-8472 Bas.— Lou-fan, 4466-5491 Ba-i. — Wu-hwan, 
542l-3i Bas., also written 5421-423) Bas. — Tung-hu, litt. Eastern 
Hu, 4108-8472 BA^.—Siefi-pi, 12S13-1006 Bas. 

785) Szema Tsien, She Ki, kiv. 43, fol. 22 v ; kir. 69, f. 2 v. 

35) 5 '-vm Tsien , kiv. 69, f. 1, says that the Su-Ts'in was a native of 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 177 

Loh-yang, in the Tung Tchou or Eastern Tehou Kingdom. The 
Kingdom of tchou was thus called since its transfer at Loh-yang in 
770 B.C. and its fallen fortunes. — The league organised by Su-Ts^'in 
was between the yeH, tchao, han, ts'i and ts'u states, but internal 
strife destroyed the combination, and he was assassinated in 318 B.C. 
The history fills the 69th book of the She Ki. W. F. Mayers has 
given a short notice uf this remarkable man in his Manual, I, 626. 

737) C!, She Ki, kiv. 34, f. 5. And below, n,-te 739. 

74S) Cf. She Iu\ kiv, 69, f. 2 v. — J'cheng tze tung. — Khaiig-hi tze tien, 
s.v. K't (12535 Bas.). 

739) Cf. my notes on Earliest Horse-riding in Western and Eastern 
Asia. 

740) Tst'en Han Shu, Kiv. dA.— She Ki, Kiv. 43, fol. 22 sq. 

741) Hue, 12067 or 121 2 Bas. — Khang hi Tze tien, s.v. — Kwang yun, 
s.v. — T.P., 69S, 6. — ^The Shih ming of the Han period says that hile 
is a word of the Hu language. Cf. the Corean wood hey. 



Chap. VII. —Fifth Period : 4 81-221 b.c. 
Sect. C. Western Influences by Southern Channels. 

a. Ilorimiz Navy in South-Eastern China. 

198. The few double-ej-ed, dragon-like Merchantmen ^^^ of tlie Ery- 
tliTa?an Sea which continued to carry an international trade notwitlistand- 
ing the temporary check caused by some unknown event on their route, to 
bo guessed only through their fabled acc(junts of the Five Fairy islands^ 
did not cease entirely to frequent the eastern coast of China after 380 
B.c.''-^"^ The removal of the capital of Yueh to Wu (i.e. Su-tchou in 
Kiang-sii), and the internecine wars in the vicinity of the Gulf (»f Kiao- 
tchou ( S. Shantung) had ruined the foreign trade of the once great em- 
porium of Tsih-moh. As we suspected, they shifted their arrivmg station 
towards the South, in the Hang-tchou bay, near which Kon-tsien, King 
of Yueh had began to start at Kwei-ki, a market town in 473 b.c, in 
the vain hope of enticing to remain there his exminister Fan-li, the great 
est Chinese merchant of his age.'*^ But there was for a time a marked 
slackening of activity. 

199. In 334 n.c. tlie powerful state of Ts'o was finally successful in its 
protracted struggle against its eastern neighbour of Yueh ; Wu-Kiang 
king (if the latter state was killed, and the territory from Su-tchou (in 
Kiang-su N.W.) on the S, borders of Ts'i, to the Tchekiang river, near 
Kwei-ki, was absorbed by the Ts'u kingdom. Tlie rulers of that state 



CHINES? CIVILISATION. 179 

ceuld thus get for tliemaelves the rarities which tlie foreign traders used 
to import. A(!Cordinglj when Hvvei, Duke of Ts'in, assumeil for the first 
time in 324 B.C., the title of King, Siang Wang of Ts'u conld send him 
some vahiable presents. Besides a hundred of chariots, he presented him 
with a hirge ring of ye-kwang , i.e. of the stone which shines at night, 
otherwise of 2/rt^«< ruby of Badakshan''^ •'>, and a hiacki rhinoceros, i.e. a 
Rh. laslotis, ear-haired, of Northern India, two varieties usually imported 
by these traders.''**^ 

200. Their influence made itself felt also by several material innovations; 
for instance the curious system of casting coins in clusters shaped like 
trees, which was then obtaining in the western swrld.''*'' Some time 
before important progress, traceable to the same source, in Astronx)my 
and Mathematics, is shewn by the Tchou pi swan Icing, which an as- 
tronomical statement recorded therein proves to have been written within 
the years 527-450 b.c.'^''^. It is the only ancient work we have on the 
Kai-tien system of Astronomy, in which the heavens are represented as a 
concave sphere.'*^ 

201. The conquest of yueh in 33J:, did no tresult in the complete 
extinction of her Royal house. Several princes fled further South along 
the Coast and created centres of influence which uevelope_d,into States 
and Kingdoms. About the site of the present Ning-po,'"^*' grewa Marqui- 
sate of J/oM, which was a trading centre at the beginning of the third 
century b.c,'^^^ The south-west of this saw the rising of the Kingdom 
of Tung-hai. w^hose centre was in the present prefecture of Tai -tchou in 
Tchehkiang C, and which extended to the sea borders. South of the 
preceding, with its centre at Tung-yeh, the present Fuhtchou of Fuhkien, 
and its southern limit N. of the present Tsiuen-tchou, rose the Kingdom 
qI M tn-y uehj^- The Month of the il/t'w river was therefore a centres 
of foreign trade in the first quarter of the fourth century B.C. 

202. The state of ts'u was then engaged in its deadly struggle with the 
ts'in of Shensi, and by its system of encroaching everywhere possible, was 
rather disquieting its weaker neighbours. It became consequently the 
policy of the small states to seek alliances wherever they could. We are 
made aware of two instances of such a conduct by the king of the new 
state of YUEH. In 312 b.c. he sent an ambassador named Kung-se Yu 
to the king of Wei, which state by its commanding position in Eastern 
Honan, between the Hwang -ho and the Hwai river, had acquired a politi- 
cal importance. The envoy took away with him as presents 300 boats 
laden with five hundred thousand arrows,'? ^3 rhinoceroses (si^)'^* horns 



180 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

and elephants siang,'^^^ tusks.' ^^ On the other side of the Shantung 
peninsula, in the present Tchih-li province was the state of Yen then ruled 
by spirited kings, enamoured with novelties, as we have seen in previous 
paragraphs,'^*' and holding a high position among their co-princes of the 
Chinese agglomeration. In 310 b.c. perhaps at the occasion of his re- 
cent accession to his throne, the King Tchao of tkn was presented by the 
same southern king with a Red ship; a large vase, carved and ornament- 
ed, containing a rare sort of grease, lamps with asbestos wicks^^^ and a 
peculiar sort of fish oil giving a great light ; and besides these objects, 
two beautiful dancing girls. '^^ Tradition says that they had come from 
the east of Fang-tchang, one of the Fortunate islands, which may be 
identified with some island North of Sumatra, either Banca as already 
suggested, ''^^ or more probably Bintang at the eastern extremity of the 
straits of Malacca. As Asbestos wicks could not be got from elsewhere 
than Badakshan and the rainless plains of North India, where we know 
that such wicks were made, '^^^ we have here as well as in a fable connected 
with it some indications about the country which supplied these sea- 
traders, and from the vicinity of which they used to come to the Chinese 
Ocean, '^2 i.e. the North-west sea borders of India, and the entrance of 
the Persian Gulf. We shall see some other evidence to the same effect 
in the following paragraph. 

2 03. Ses'amum, introduced after Quinces by the same eastern sea 
trade in the sixth century, '°' testifies, by its earliest Chinese name Ku- 
sheng,''^' obviously connected with the Persian Kimd;ud, Malay widjin, 
and bendjam in Sumatra, of its route of importation. Ye-kwang^lvtkxai 
of c. 400 B.C. has been spoken of in a previous page.^^^ It was about 
the same time that pearls began to be imported in China, as we shall see 
directly and little afterwards that cubebs of Java were known in western 
Asia."<'6 

The Chinese, contrarily to an oft repeated statement'^'"' "^ were not ac- 
quainted with the pearl before c. 400 b.c. They knew the thin and 
nacreous fresh water mussels of the Hwai river since the days of the Yil 
ktmg, and probably the seed-pearls from the Mouths of the Yang-tze since 
tlie seventh century. ^^^ The earliest references to the pearl occur in 
writers of the fourth century Meh-ti, Lieh-tze, Tsou-hien, and others, 
in such prizing terms that its novelty cannot be doubted .'^^^ In some 
cases it is coupled to the Ye-kicangJ"^^ And the name of M in g-g weti 
a transfer and folk-etymology of the western word for it, shows moreover 
its "Western Origin, ^''^ most probably from the pearl fisheries of the Per- 



CHINESE •CIVILISATION. 181 

sian Gulf, not of Coylon.'^''^ Id the second century b.c. we are told tliat 
those who imported them were no otlier than the Ilwang-tche,''' ^ or yel- 
low-fingered traders of the Erythrjean sea, at the entrance of the Persian 
Gulf, and we know that there was the emporium for the pearl-trade. 
The Chinese bjcame thus acquainted with the pearl little after the 
Western world.^'^ 

204. We may derive also from the statements of 310 b.c. a precious 
indication on a part of the Sea loute followed by these merchantmen 
which must have ceased to pass through the straits of Malacca. The loss 
of two of their five stations about 400 b.c, drifted away in the North 
by the wickedness of some neighbours, as told in the Fable of the For- 
tunate Islands,''* disguised most probably some event which had led to 
a change of route and the adoption of a more southern course. The slack- 
ening of their Activity which activity about 375 b.c. they did not transfer 

bodily from their Northern Emporia in Shantung to another one in the 

South, '''^^ shows an hesitation in their adoption of a new route. \nd 
this new route is first indicated by the circumstances of the present event. 
The route of these dealers in Asbestos we are told, led east of i^an^ 
tchcing. Further more, the Shen y Jcmg'^''^ of Tung-fang to (150-100 
B.C.) says that this aiibestos came from, i.e. through, Uwo-ltn, otherwise, 

Hu-Uavg'^''^ in Szema Tsien, otherwise Ho-ling (in later times) a name 
of the S.E. of Java as a Kalinga colony from Eastern India established 
there about that time.''^^ As the Sunda straits were not opened before 
A.D. 416, and the Bali, Lombok and Alias straits along afterwards, '^"^ the 
Jlerchantmen in C|uestiou must have passed through the Sapy straits. 
East of Sumbawa. This physical circumstances had a rather important 

influence on the articles of trade in subsequent centuries as w^e shall see 
further on, and led to the discovery of cloves and nutmegs. 

205. No denomination has appeared yet in any of tlie occasions re- 
ferred to about these West Asiatic traders who had then frequented the 
coasts of China for several centuries. A convenient name for them, 
justified by the nature of their imports, for want of a more precise know- 
ledge, might be that of E r y t h r a?a n s which covers all their possible 
sea-coasts of departure, for the period preceding the fourth century, and 
some time afterwards. In the absence of any written record of this cir- 
cumstance, — absenceas much due to the factof their emporia in China being 
outside the Chinese dominion for the time being, as to the wrecks of 
literature, — all that we have been able to say about them has come from 
gathering chance allusions, isolate facts and scrap statements in various 



182 ORIGIN OF THE EARLT 

works, which hitherto liad neither been put together nor studied in a 
comparative manner. As we advance iu time, more statements have es- 
caped the havoc of ages, and less curtailed they have been 'n the trans- 
mission, so that we hear at last of their name. 

206. These foreign import^s of Quinces, Sesamum, precious^arls, ya- 
kut iiems, Asbestos, magnifying glasses, Rock crystal, Indian Rhinoceroses, 
already referred to, and of Jessamine, Sambac, Henjoa, Sugar, coloured- 
glass, and other rarities afterwards, were calledthe Hwang-tcheJ^^ Thename 
means id ^ngraphically the yellow-fingered and refers to their practice of 
dying the-.,fingers tips with the henna, still at present followed by the 
Arabs, Persians and people of British India. ''^•' Their country was situ- 
ated at 30000 U distance of South China. ^^^ As there are variants in 
the way of spelling it, we uiav be sure that it is a phonetic transfer, al- 
tered by the limitations of Chinese orthoepy and ileographic rendering 
of their own name. And taking these reservations into account, we re- 
cognize in this Hwang-tche a distant imitation of Ha rmo zi a, later 
Hormuz, the famous emporium which shifted several times its position. 
at the entrance of the Persian Galf.^^5 This unexpected find, which 
tlirows some more light on the whole subject, concurs entirely with all 
the foregoing circumstances. 

Notes 



74:') Supra. § 118, note 444. 

743) Supra, ■§ ) 80. 

744) Cf. Szema Tsien, She Ki, Kiv. 41, fol. 11-12, and kiv. 139, fol 3 
vers, — SonK3 circumstances of the biography of Fan-li are partly re- 
sumed in F.W.Mayers, Chinese R.M., I., 1:^7. — Fan-li had been a 
minister in Yueh for over 20 years, when after the successes of his na- 
tive state over the kingdom of Wu, in 472 B.C., probably sick or his 
politics, he withdrew into private life and started a lucrative trade, pro- 
bably at Kwei-ki ; but he left the place and went to the Five lakes 
{Kning hu), and from there, under an assumed name, he went to Tao, 
the modern Ting-t'ai) of S.W. Shantung, which, placed in the centre 
of the Chinese dominion, was more convenient for his commercial 
purposes. —According to the Wa i/ueh tchun isiu : Tai ping yll Ian, 
Iviv. 935, fol. 7., it was at the instigation of Fan-li that pisciculture 
was started at Kwei-ki. On the Chinese pisciculture, cf. Hue, U Empire 
Ohinois, 1 1., 433-4. — St. Julien & P. Champion, Industries de L' Empire 
Chinois, 230. — J.H. Gray. China, 291-2. 

745) They used to import i/akut ruby stones since the fifth century. Cf. 
my paper 0)i Yakut precious stones from Oman to N. China, in B.& 0. 
R., June, 1893. vol. VI., p. 271. 

74G) Let us remark however that, as far as I am aware, this was the first 
case of importation of a rhinoceros, which, as shown by its curious 
name, was different from those which were found in the South of the 



CHItTKSl'; civil, ISMIi.N. 183 

country. Tlio words used are liiai-ki tclii ■■^<\ 12514-111)29-41-5671, 
Bas., i.e. a cliicken-frightening rhinoceros, or Uli. of Iliai-ki, if the 
latter are the transfer of a nroper name. It became an usual article of 
importation by the se.i-traders of Ta-tsin^Tarsliish, and is described 
in the conuiientaries of tlio Hou Han sliu, as a Rh. that has sometliing 
lianging about him. (Cf. tiie quotation in F. Hirth. China and the 
Rnmaii Orient, p. 41, l?i, 79, wliero no identification is suggested.) 
Now the Rl inoceros is ratlier an unwieldy animal, and there is only 
one species of it which has anything unusual hanging about its body. 
It is the Rh. lasiotis tliat has hair on the ears. The traders of oldeu 
times in search of curiosities had hit upon tliis animal, and we see one 
of them figured on the black obelisk of Salmanazzar with monkeys and 
elephants of India. Cf. Perrot-Chipiez, Chaldee-Assi/rie, \k 565 ; F, 
Lenormant, Hist. Auc. IV, 191. The hair of the animal has sug- 
gested several critics unaware of the particularity that, notwithstanding 
the horn, it was not the figure of a rhino<eros. Frangois Lenormant, 
Nomsde V airaln. I.e. p. 409, gives the name susa, rhinoceros. Cf. 
the Chinese se. The explanation contained in the present note ought 
fo dispel any hesitation, 

747) Cf, S. W. Bushell, Roman and Chinese Coinage : China Review, 
I, Sept. 1892. — Alex. Cunningham, Coins of Ancient India from the 
earliest ti',Ms, 1881, p. 60. — T. de L., Catalogue of Chinese coins, 1892, 
introd. xxix. 

748) Cf. J. B. Blot, Asfronomie Indienne et Chnoise, pp. 298, 304. &c. 

749) A. Wylie, Notes on Chinese Literature, p. "^6. — On the nine tri- 
gonometric propositions in the first part of this work which shows 
an undoubted connection with Western Science, cf. A. Wylie, The Sci- 
ence of the Chinese, Arithmetic: in the North China Herald, 18lt:^ 
and -Z'A^? Chinese and Japanese Repository, IS''-^- "" '**--^ '' -^^"^"^ ' 
491-5U0, II, 69-73. Also T. de L, '"-^^ ^^(^ numerals, i'\^J{<'^^f^'9 
rods and theSwan pan in China (N'lmismatic Chronicle 3, 111, R83) 
p. 33. -Herodotus (II, 109) attrilutes to Sesostris (? Ramses 11) the 
beginnings of geometry wb-'r-i statement can be but the result ot a 
confusion, as Prof. Eisec.'ohr has discovered that mathematics were 
studied at the court ,-,{ the Hycsos princes, as the Rhind papyri con- 
tain a work on^^ometry (written for Apepi I) which may be described 
as a treatise on applied arithmetic. . 

750) Cf. foF instance the history of Tchu-tchung, a famous dealer in 
pearh- estiblish.d at Kwi-U during the reigns -of Ivao hou and of 
IV-7na--ti of the First Han dynasty, in the Lieh sientchuenoi Liu-lnang, 
'b'c °8U-9 : TP. 803, 6._Tsouyen (378-300 b.c.) on whom cf. s«/.-., 

■ §' 195, could say that Pearls grow in the southern seas. KA, i.f. 

^OLTtll ?'» (cl. 163 + 104U-29. Ba.) territory. Cf. T.P. 

171 3 —Moii, 104 »4 Bas., means "exchange, barter 
752) Cf. Szema Tsien, She hi, kiv. 114, fol. 1, and gluss.-ra: pmg j,u 

75^)Tlhuh\hri]'nien, Y, xxxiv, 3.-The mission went apparently 
along the se.v-coast and by the Hwai river and an affluent 

754^ Rhinoceroses existed in China in historical times, as shown by the 
following evidence. A fesv years before the overthrowof the shang-yk 
dynasty by the Tchou-ites, llD B.C., Tai Rung Wang the famous 



ISi OKIGIN OP THE KARLT 

minister of tchou, procured from V-Kiii, modern King-yang fu in E. 
Kansnh, a rliinoceros — sze which ho presented to Shon, the king of 
Shang-yn. C. Han shi loai tchven, hy Han Yng, 173-156 b.c. — T.P. 
2^90, 2, — A visible amplification of a slender truth says that when the 
Duke of TCHOu, siiote the native state of yen, corresponding to the 
present Yen-tchou of S.W. Shantung, he drove far away, from these 
and other places tigers, leopards, rhinoceroses {si), and elephants. 
(Cf. Mencius, III, 2, ix, 6). This would have happened between the 
years 1107-1099 k.c. (cf. Chin. Class. Ill, introd.' 144-1-15. and p. 
493). — In his iGth year, i.e. 1025 b.c. King 'fcliao of tchou having 
crossed the Han river, N.W. Hupeh, met with a large rhinoceros-sec. 
King )' of the same dynasty, in his 6th year, i.e. 879 b c, when hunt- 
ing in the forest of Shay, Honan, captured a rhinoccro3-.<se, and carried 
it home. Cf. Tchuh shu ki nlen, s.a. — In 818 b.c, in tlie Royal hunt- 
ing grounds near the Western Capital i.e. Hao king, modern Si-an, 
S. Shensi, the King Siuen of tchou bunded a large rhinoceros i sze). 
(Cf. Shi King, II, iii, 6).— The King Tchwang of xsii, (613-590 n.c.) 
while bunting at Yun-raeng, the present Teh-an fu in Hupeh E., 
killed a rhinoceros {sze). Cf. Lu slie, I'chun tsiu : T. 1'. 890, 4 v. — 
In the Er-ya vocabulary (c. 50O B.C.) Rhinoceroses-s2e and elephants 
are said to be numerous iu the mountains of Liang, i.e. of N.E. 3ze- 
tchuen. — ^The Shan hai king the celebrated Romantic geography of the 
TCHOU period, mentions RhinoceroPes-«'and elephants intlie Min skan, 
i.e. N.W. Szetchuen (kiv. V, fol. 29), and in the S.W. of Kansuh (kiv. 
II, ful. 6 v.), many rhinoceroses sze and si in W. Kwangsi (kiv. I, 
fol. 8), rbinoceroses-sze in the south of the Siang river, S.E. Hunan, 
(kiv. X, fol. 2), rliinosceroses-.*/ in W. Hunan (kiv. X, tol, 2 vers.), 
and white (?) rhinoceroses-sj in Hupeh (kiv. V, fol. 27 t^.- In the 
Tso tchuen, Hi kung, xxiii, 4, i.e 637 B.C., we hear that the I rince of 
' '^\' iSiwm S 1 So '"'' «nd rbinocemsos' hides in his own dominion, i.e. 
Tsueouid get ivo., c*.. ,.,_ ^y],, Siuen kung, 11. 1, i.e. OO^b.^., a 
V Hupeh. And in the same wo ,,^^^ ^^^ ^^ rhinoceroses, si and sze, to 
popular song says that the want ^. ,„, ,, ^o animate the wearers.— 
supply skins for bu tic oats, but ot ,,, ^^^^ j^. ^^^^^-^^^^ (j ^q 
The so-called iribute of \ U, chapter ot ti. ^^ /Loceroses' hides). 

^ 52) ele^liants teoth and hides rsupposed to^ .,,^ ^^^ ^^^^ Hwai river, 
among the products ot \ ang-tchou, i.e. the i>o"--u e^id^nee piled 
and of Iving-tcliou. i.e. Hunan.— The outcome ot all C'v^j^j^^ q^Jj^^ 
up h(M-e is that rhin<ic'eroses were not unfroquent in ^^''-- -..^^ 'o.j.a(j^ 
"^ even in the Northern provinces, and that in course of time ^'^^'-^.^^-^ 
ually receded to the Southern parts of the country. It is not_ cei ^ 
that the two words for rhinoceros, however promiscuously used in son. 
instances where they are quoted together, were not applied to two 
ditfeient species of rhinoceros. Si would be a rh, with two horns of equal 
length, and sze a rh. with one horn sometimes hmg of three spans. 
With one exception one in Mencius" statement) where it may be a 
clerical error, the two species are rather well distinguished by their geo- 
graphical habitat, the si species in the West, not South-west, and the 
sze species in the East and the South East.— In their original writing 
of Western descent, the Chinese had no distinct character fur rhmoceros, 
and where they came across the animal they called it si^jiiu. :i265 Bas. 
- cl, 93, tlie obdurate bull, hy two cliaractcr? which afterwards combined 
together have made tlie s\nd)ol si, 567lBas. In the Eastthey adopted 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 185 

a pict irial modification of their symbol she-p\g, cl. 153 which subs- 
quently altered, has become the special symbol s:e, .'>91 I5as. Cf. the 
successive forms of the two symbi>ls in Min Ts'i kill, Luh shu tung, 
kiv. I, 'JH, 26, and V, 13. It seems that the symbol sze was one of 
tho?e which were framed for convenience, in iguorance of the principles 
of composing new characters of the standard writing, by some fraction 
of the Chinese cummnnity more illiterate tlian the others. Cf. on this 
phenomenon my historical Catalogue of Chinese Co'vs, Enrly period, 
introd. p. xxxiii ; and The oldest Book of the Chinese, vol. I, 1892, 
par. 15'). 
756) The Chinese cliaracter, »S'/(n?^, e 1 e p h a n t is one of the most in- 
terestinij of the writing. It is one of the few hierofflviiliics which 
have been looked upon as indigenous evidence against the extraneous 
origin claimed by us for the early written characters of China. Of 
course we intend to speak of the usual character for elephant (10352 
Bas.) and not of the rude picture which appears on some Ancient 
vases as a special mark, and not as a character of the writing. — In 
their stock of written synibols of Western Origin, the ancient Chin- 
ese had no sign for e lepha n t as happened with the rhinoceroses after- 
wards. A s they became acquainted with the elephant when crossing 
Honan little after their entrance in China proper, they framed a new 
symbol for it by combining together two actual symbols of their writ- 
ing. In accordance with the traditional principles of the script, they 
took into consideration the forui-,of the olyect to be represented and 
the soun(i^4o be expressed, in so far as permitted by the internal ar- 
rangement of the strokes composing the signs at their disposal. The 
native name of the great pachyderm was sam, sham, tsam, sang, song, 
&c. Consequently they selected their cliaracter she, p i g, as recognized 
by the first author of the Shivoh Wen, and they have written over it 
a contracted form of Mien, effort, (586 Bas. Cf, Min Ts'i kih, Luh 
shu tiling, k. vi, f. 24-. By this process the scribes contrived to figure 
the intended animal in a sort of clumsy way, and at the same time to 
suggest the sound to be read, from bottom to top SHE-(-M, as is most 
usual in kii-wen. A positive proof of this phonetic intention consists 
in the variants of spelling which exhibit Mien, f ac e ( 1:?033 Bas.; or 
Muh, eye, cl. 109, instead of Mien, e ^ori. These substitutes were 
perhaps used afterwards, in the occasions where the compound sjmbol 
was not intended foreleph ant, as the shapes of these two characters, 
though placed also above the character she, did not display the same 
suggest iveness of an elephant's head. When in after times the old 
mode of orthography was forgotten and disappeared under the encroach- 
ments of the pri'cesses of ideo-phi^uetic formation, i.e. symbols made 
either of characters having each their sound and their meaning, or of 
an ideographic character mute joined to a phonetic charactermeaning- 
less, such compounds as those made according to the old method like 
those referred to, were no longer in harmony with the currrnt views of 
the scribes and were open to change. She was preserved as a silent 
ideograph, pnd the sign tchem. to absorb (lOlS Bas.) as a phonetic 
was substituted to the M — characters of Antiquity. The Ancient 
scribes have always displayed a considerable anionnt of ingenuity and 
taste in their attempts at satisfying the various cnnditions here des- 
cribed, and they ha/e often attained better results than clumsy shapes 



186 CHINESE CIVILIPATION. 

and approximative sounds. Tlie ])lionetic system of orthography by a 
rnde process of Aerology and syllabisni \y.is lost before the Tchou 
dynasty, but the scribes of after ages have been real worshippers of their 
written characters, and in their arrangements and combinations have 
made of the Chinese writing a most remarkable art. On the early or- 
thograpliy in Ku-wen, of. The oldest Book of the Chinese, par. 23 and 
n., 46-52 ; Beginnings of ivriting par. 50; Languages of China before 
the Chinese, par. 167, n. -', 185, n. I ; E. K. Douglas, Further pro- 
gress in Chinese studies, &c. 
756 j Elephants were living jts far as thejxorth of Central China, when 
the Chinese dominion first extended in thejand. A younger brother 
of the famous Slum (2004-1996 B.C. rect. chronol.) was sent away to 
settle in Yu Pi (Sontli Honan not Hunan) cf. Shu King, I, iii, 12 ; 
Mencius, V, i, 3. — In the geographical and hydrngraphieal survey of 
the Shang dynasty called the Til kung, the same SouUi_of Honan and 
tlie adjacent lands were denominated Yii-siang tchou, (shortened into 
Til tchou) which means province of the dncile elephants. These two 
names are clear evidence that elephants were then living in the region. 
The same document, as shown in our note on Rhinoceroses, mentions 
elephants teeth as products of N. Hunan, and of the S. of Hwai river. 
y — Elephants are spoken of in 110^, S.W. of Shaij^tung, and about 500 
i;.c. in the N.E. and N.W. of Szetchuen. (Cf. preceding note). — 
Ele})hants teeth could be procured Jrom Hupeh, in G37 B.C. 'fbid.) — 
In 506 B.C. elephants were used iu N. Kiangsi for war against Wu 
by the state of Ts'u. (Cf. 'fso-tchuen, Ting kung, iv, 14). — Writing 
in A.D. 89, the anthor of the Shivoh wen described the elephant as an 
animal of Nan-yueh, i.e. Kwangtung and Kwangsi. — The name of 
Elephants' province, Siang kiun was given in 215 B.C. by Ts'in Slie 
Hwang-ti to the region including the South of Kwangtung, Kwang- 
si, and part af Tungking (.'jzema Tsien, She Ki, kiv. 1)3. fol. 1) 
covering perhaps the provinces of Tai nguyen, Son-tay, Hung hoa, 
Nghe-an and Thanh Hoa, (Hoang Viet dia du ch?, II. 9 r. ; 1, 47 ; 
II, 3, 31, 16), but the limits were rather undefinite and lasted only 
ten years, — We may consider the foregoing evidence as showing a 
gradual retreat of the elephant in China from the North centre to the 
S.S.W. borders. Liu-Siin, Ling j^iao luh y, of the 7th cent., says 
that in the departments of Stun and Tch'ao, in the S.E. of the pre- 
sent province of Kwangtung, wild elephants were still numerous, while 
among the Mengs (=Mnongs, Shan districts) of Southern Yunnan, 
the elephants were employed to carry burdens like oxen and horsea 
in the Middle Kingdom. Cf. T.P. 890, 8.— 

757) CL supra §§ 1/3,195. 

753) These could come but from Badakshan and Northern India. Cf. 
note 761, On Asbestos. 

759) Cf. Wang tze nien, Shih y ki. — Tai ping gu Ian, kiv, 9 "0, fol. 9 
vers., and 816, 8.— The Iving is said to have received these foreigners 
in his famous tang or Audience hall of T^ung yun. 

760) Cf. supra, § 125-126.— On Bintang, cf. H. Yule, Marco Polo (2) 
n, 261. 



CHINES •: CIVILISATION. 187 



Sect. C. Western Ivflueiu-e>< by Southern Channel.^, 

a. Hormuz Nmn/ in South-Eastern China. 

KoTES contin'ied 

761 j Asbestos co.me to the knowledge of the Chinese during tlie reign 
of TcWenq, the second king of the Tchou dynasty. Barbarians of the 
West, coming by thn Kukunor presented him with some asbestos 
cloth. (Cf. Ki tchung Tchou shu). — Tlie next instance in date is that 
of Muh Wang who was presented also with asbestos by Iviutn-Jungs 
inhabiting the same region, about 990 b.c. (Cf. supra, notes 169 and 
249). — B.idakshan near the source of the Oxus was the chief producer 
of lapisla/.uli and of asbestos, — the stone for wicks — according to the 
Arab travellers. Cf. M. Reinand - Stan. Guyard, Gengraphie rf' 
Abalfeda [I, ii, 2O5 quoting Ibn Haukal and the LoiaJ of Tbn-el-Athir. 
— Cyprus was another country producer of Asbestos in Antiquity. Cf. 
G. Maspero, Histoire Ancienne, p. 237? — Pliny was av7are that the 
asbestos cloth was produced in the rainless deserts of India, (xix, 1, 4). 
— Silky amianthus occurs in flat beds or veins above the Khost valley 
south of the Kurram, Afghanistan') where the hill people there twist 
it still at present into ropes. (Cf. E. Balfour, Cycloped. oj India, 
1385; t, 129). — We have just seen in our text an importation by 
sea of asbestos wicks in North China, 31 b.c, which had been brought 
by Hormuz Merchantmen. From the Han period down to the fiftiv 
century, Asbestos cloth was recki med among the Tats'in — orTarshish— • 
imports. (Cf. Hou Han shtih, k. 88 ; San Kivoh tchi, Wei lioh, k. 
30 ; Tsin shu, k. 97 ; Sung shu, k. 97 ; F. Hirth, China and the 
Roman Orient, pp. 41, 45, 46, 7i.) Tung Fang-so of the second cen- 
tury B.C. said that it was coming from [i.e. through) the Southern 
Ocean. ( She.i y king; T.P. 820, 8 v.\ 869, 7; Shih tchou ki, T.P. 
S6?, 8). — In 381-3 A. D., Hindus from Uabul presented asbestos cloth 
to the court of the Fqrmeb Ts'rN at Tchang-an. (Cf. Tsien Ts'ir. 
luh ; Shih luh kwoh tchun tsiu : T.P, 8-0, 8 ; Bunju Nanjio, Cafal 
Bmld. Tripitaka, p. 403). It was probably from the same region that 
in 235 AD, had come the men from the .ii-yii who accompanied with 
double interpreters presented asbestos cloth to the court of Wei at 
Loh-yang (cf. Wei tchi : T.P. 820, 8). — In the 2nd cent. a.d. Asbes- 
tos was discovered in Caina, in the Yii. shan ov Feathers' -hill, on the 
common borders of Shantung and Kiangsu provinces. (Cf. Wangkia, 
Shih y ki ; T.P. 820, 9 v, and 12, 10). And the famous conspirator 
Liang-hi who died in 159 a.d., was enabled to play the joke, practised 
at J he court of the Emperor Charles V, which was well known at the 
time of Pliny. (Cf. F. Hirth, China and the Roman Orient, p. 250- 
1), with an unlined garment made of Asbestos cloth from the Yd shan. 



188 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

(cf. San kwoh tchi, Wei tchi : "Wang Kia, loc. cit.) Some more as- 
bestos cloth came from the same place to the court of the Tsin dynasty 
at Lob-yang in the years Tal-k\xng 280-9 a. d. The local population 
claimed to have presented some of their identical veined stone to Yao 
and Shan, amplified into a wowen cloth by later tradition. (Cf. T.P. 
8-0, 9 V.) On the asbestos of Shantung and its use for stoves, cruci- 
bles, and so forth, by the. inhabitants there. (Cf. Alex. Williamson, 
Journeys in North-Chnm, 1870, I, 1 29.^1 Under the Yuen dynasty 
asbestos was discovered in Szetehuen. (Cf. Yuan she ; Sheng ngan 
tsih by Yaug-shen, 148^-1559; G. Schlegel, Neflerl. Ch'm. Woortl. 
iii, lOGG). Consul Alexander Hosie, Three i/ears in Wester7i China, 
1890, p. 160, reports having seen some asbestos cloth there. 
762) Fabulous account of the Asbestos, making it the hair-of a buri-ow- 
ing animal of volcanic (Sunda) islands, already current at the time of 
Tung-fang So, circ. 150-100 n.c, and confirmed by later reports {2\ 
P.Y.L.. kiv. 820, 8 ; ^68, 8 ; 8 09, 7 ; and 78 , 8), refer most posi- 
tively to East Java, where no asbestos is found any more than in any 
other of the Sunda islands. — The story of the Salamander passing 
unhurt through fire is at least as oldas Aristotle, but it was not known 
when the fable arose that asbestos was a substance derived from the 
animal, (H. Yule, Marco Polo, I, 217). The Chinese sources permit 
us to say that it was current in the second cent. m.c. It was a Persian 
story. Bakin says the animal is found at Ghur near Herat and is 
like a mouse. Another author quoted by D'Herbelot, says it is like a 
marten. Similar animals are found in the deserts of Chinese Turkes- 
tan since antiquity between Kharo Khodjo and Khotan. They ^^ere 
spoken of as yellow rats, ?iwang shit, in the old Miih J"ien /ze tchuen 
(China Review, 1889, xvii, 23:5) of the 10th cent. B.C. containing 
Records of the Journey of Muh Wang in Turkestan. They were des- 
cribed also in the Si yii tchu kwoh tchi of the 5th cent, (cf, T.P.Y.L. 
911. 6 ; description of the Shii icang ktroh) ; in the T'ang shu, (kiv. 
258 h, Yii-tien) and later v.'orks. (Cf, Stan, Julien, Mel. d. Geogr. 
Astat., p. 99j. Dr. E. Bretschneider says that they are jumping 
hares or Gerhoas (cf. Chinese intercourse lolth the Countries of Asia, 
Art. IJuo choi„). Their [jresence gave rise in the middle Ages to the 
location there of the old Afghan Myth, and Marco Polo has reported 
at length a statement denying its veracity. Cf. Marco Polo, ed, Yule, 
I, 215). — Another fabulous origin of Asbestos is that which made it 
the bark of trees growing on a volcanic island East of Funam, in Java. 
Tlie story came to China through the trade with Funam=Phnom = 
Cambodia, in the third and 4th" cent. a.d. (cf. T.P.Y.L., kiv. 820, 8; 
86S, 8 r. ; 669, 5 : 960, 9 r. 

763) Liu Hiang, Lieh t:i>^.n tchuen. — T.P.Y''.L., 989, 5 v. 

764) Ku-sheng, 11420-90. Bas. 

765) Cf. supra, par. 199. 

766) Cf. Kvmakon in Theophrastes and the Javanese A' ?o» ?t kus 
as pointed out by Col. H. Yule, ^[arco Polo, II, 380. 

767) Based upon the pin-tchu (9608-5917 Bas.) of the Hwai river in 
the Yii kung,\, 35. Now these pin-tchu of fresh water could not be 
pearl-oysters of the sea. They have been identified with the pung 
(9401 Bas.) of later times, the Uniumdce, fresh water mussels; the 
addition of tchu was to indicate a selection of the best and most nacre- 



CHIKESE CIVILISATION. 189 

nus ones. 

763) Cf. Kican-tze: T.P. 803, 1 v. 

709) Cf. Lieh-tze.—Tsou]ven.—Tchwai\g-tze—TchanKwohtsth —T.P. 
803 ; 2, 2v., i. 

770) Cf- Meh-ti .—'^ .^ . 9-L\, 5. 

771; Isl^A. Ming-yueh, shining moon, (389C-cl. 74 Bas.)— Cf. San?kr. 
inaniLuta : Greek maragdos ; Latin margaritu ; Persian niarioid ; &c. 

77"J) ^eartlius speaks oi' an island of the gulf, noted for its pearl 
fishery vliicli ^vas carried tkere in the same manner as in the Indian 
Ocean. (Arrian, /?u/jcrt, 38, 3). Pliny is the first who spoke of the 
Pearl fishery at TyldS, Bahrein islands. Hist, nat., vi, 28: 14^) cf. 
E. Bunbnry, Hist. Anc. Geogr., I, 4G2, 53"^. — Teh an(:-teh, a Chinese 
traveller has described those of Shiraz. in 1258. Cf. E. Bretsch- 
neider, JlJfdicErai Jicseajches, I, li5. The Arab gergrophers, Masndi, 
i, 328, Edrisi, i, 3734, Ibn Batata, ii, 246, have also described them. 
Modern descriptions have been made by Col. D. Wilson, Pearl Fish- 
enes in the Persian Gulf, J.R.G.S., iii, 1834, 283-286.— Brenner, 
Report on Piarl Fishing iii the Bay oj' Bahrein ; Peterm. Geogr. Mitth. 
• 1873 ; 37 ; E. Bretschneider, J\Jed. Pes., I, 146, II, 130.— On the 
history of the pearl fisheries of Cevlon cf. Emersen Tennent, Cei/lon, 
11.561. 

773) Tung Fang So, Lin yh ki.-Kicang tchi.—'WV.X.lj., 803, 
9, IC V. 

774) There is no world for p earl in P. Pierret, Vocabidatre Hlerogly- 
phique. I do not see any mentioned in Assyrian. The ancient clas- 
sical authors, such as Herodv^tus do not speak of pearls. No mention 

is m:ide of it in Perrot-Chipiez, Histoire de V Art Antique, vol. I-IV. 
— The pearl-fisheries of the isle of Hainan were not opened before the 
second c.^ntury ; cf . below. 

775) Cf. supra note 455. — Although Lieh-tze was living in S97 B.C., 
the legend may have been heard of by him 25 years later. 

776) I have explained the political reasons which have led to this change, 
supra § 174. 

777) Tai ping iju Ian, kiv. 820, 8 r. ; 869, 7. 

nS) These various spellings belong to the time when an official mode of 
writing the name in question had not yet been adopted. The same 
difficiilty Occurs with the Huh Tien tze tchuen and the Shan hai king 
where geographical names are written differently of what they were af- 
terwards. — Kalang was for long an ethnic in Java. 

779) The native traditions indicate about 75 b.c The Chinese evidence 
suggests SdUie fifty years earlier. — Kwoh-Poh the famous commentator 
of A.D. 276-324, gives for the same region and the same story the 
name of Tche-pu (8285-7622 Bas.), variant Tchu-pu (10173-7622 
Bas.) which is oldest appearance of the name of Java. 

780) Cf. supra, notes 474 and 475. 

781) Many gaps remain at present in reconstructing the whole fabric, 
but we may expect that some if not all of them will be filled up by 

further finds in the fragments of ancient literature, 

782) In the Tsicn Han shu ; T.P.Y.L., 785, 2 v. 

783) There are several spellings which show the foreign origin of the 
name, Hu-ang is the cl. 201 ; but the other character is tche,c\. 66, 
branch, .sometimes tche, 4140 Bas., same meaning, sometimes tche. 



190 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

334:5 Bas., finger. — In the second century they introduced in South 

China the tche-kia hwa, the finger-nail flower, as we shall see later 

on. 
78 ) Cf. Edw. Balfour, Cyct'op. of India, TI, 37. 
785) Tsien Han shto, 1. c. — The same distance is given later on for the 

country of Oman, said to be near the sea of Persia, in a.d. c. 250. 

Cf. Kang-tai, Fanam tu suh tchuen ; T.P, 787, 4. — Tsui Pao, Ku 

kin tchu; T.P., 961, 9 v. 
786 j It was spoken of by Nearchus, 325 b.c. who stopped there, but does 

not mention its trade (^Arrian, Indica, 33-35). Perhaps was it on one 

of the neighbouring islands. We have seen already that he and 

Onesicritus were acquainted with reports of Mariners travelling far to 

the South. Cf. supra, § 179, n, 648. 

b. The Great State o/ Ts'u (Hukwang, &c.) 
207. It was already one of the largest and most powerful states of the 
Chinese agglomeration when it becan)e part of it in the 7th century, and 
for a certain time afterwards it was able to keep in check the Princes of 
Ts'iN during their struggle for the Empire, Its area was very large, but 
much of it was not^hinese, thinly inhabited and uncivilised. The reign- 
ing house claimed to have been founded by a certain Ki-lien (meaning 
'heaven in the Hiung-nu language), ^^^ himself alleged to be a great- 
grandson of Tchuon-hiuh at the fifth generation. ''^^ Their surname was 
Me, bleating, and for long their language was not Chinese, as its 
meaning suggests. ''^^ They were settled at first in the Tchung Kwoh» 
or Honan. and in Wei, or the west of Yun-yang fu of N. Hupeli, among 
Taic-Shan populations. A certain YiicHiung is mentioned as instructor 
of TcHOD Wen Wung,^^'' and it is probably to the influence of his family 
that the Wei native tribes responded t o the call of Wu Wang to over- 
throw the Shang-yn dynasty and conquer the Chinese dominion. '^^^ In 
887 B.C. their chief Hiung k'iii assumed the title of king f.ir the first 
time.''^^ Their centre was between Y-tchang and King-tchou of S. Hu- 
peh, on tlie banks of the Yang-tze kiang. Known at first by the old 
name of King, famous for this region since the days of the Yil Kung, it 
bacame Ts'n in 659 b.c.^^^ It extended its territory in every direction 
until its extinction by its more powerful rival (he kingdom of Ts'in in 
223 B.C. Ts'u Tchwang wang who ruled in 613-591 b.c. had indeed 
reached already such a high rank that he was for the time being Leader 
of the Princes, exercising therefore the part of Protector which the de- 
cayed prestige and authority of the kings of Tchou did not permit them 
to occupy anymore. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 191 

208. A few circumstances show the gradual extension of tlie dominion 
of Ts'u.'^* In 696 b.c. it extended east as far as Yev-Uvg (south bor- 
der of Kiang-sii).^** In 591, complitnentary envoys ^^'' came to the 
capital, near the present Y-tchang on the Yang-tze, from Hunan, which 
was soon afterwards partly conquered. In^.D. 400, the region of Tsang- 
wu (South Hunan) was subdued and the minister Wu-ki, was sent more 
sonth to establish intercourse with the Barbarians there. '■>' This was an 
important event, as it is the first opening of relations with the South, 
riz. the modern Kwang-tung province. Then in 334, the Kingdom of 
YuEH (Tcheh kiang) was submitted, '3* and about 330 the important 
Tsu-ite kingdom of Tsen in Yunnan was founded. ''^^ Altliough the com- 
munications between the new state and the mother country were not al- 
ways easy and required a good deal of warfare, they were seldom interrupted 
notwithstanding the efforts of the kings of Ts'is.^"" The new state of 
Tsen has played an important part in the history of the trade routes of 
the South-west, which we have told in a previous part of this work.^^i 
About 280 B.c.^°2 the Tsenites had made an expedition to the South and 
according to the Burmese history destroyed the Old Pagan, the capital of 
Burma. It is the first appearanca in iiistory of the name of Tsen for 
China,^°3 and therefore it deserves a special notice. 

209. Notwithstanding its inland position, the Kingd un of Tsu suc- 
ceeded, in course of time as we have just seen, to open outlets and inlets 
with the outside world, East, South, West and South-west. We know 
very little of its internal history, but that little is enough to show that 
its political importance and its wealth attracted much from the exterior. 
The competition of its various race? made it a centre of activity which 
had some influence on the civilisation of China in general, a.t that time. 
Not a few fa-eign notions and things were half-siiiicised therein and thus 
became m^ire acceptable to the Chinese minds of the central North. Such 
for instance were the coinage of stamped lumps on the Lydian pattern 
in 590-600 b.c, the hand-swipe or shaiaf, in the 3am3 century, which 
we have already mentioned.^'^* The horse-shoe shape of the tombs and 
the wei-kan pillars, both reminding the natural worship popular in 
India,^**^ must also be added to the preceding. 

210. It was undoubtedly thiough the Southern advance of the Tsu- 
ites towards the South, that the Chinese became acquainted for the first 
time with tlie cinnamon treeS^^ of North Kwang si, in the fifth century, 
when Fan-li tiie famous merchant made a trade of it, "^^ probably not 
with foreigners. ^■''^ 



i^ 



1&2 ORIGIN OF THB EARLY 

Some other Southern and foreign plants came thus to be imported in 
Central China. Kiii-yuen, 314 B.C., in his famous poem Li sao^'^^lias enu- 
D^erated several of them ; for inptance the Kim kwei, a small sort of cin- 
namon which grows in Tungking .*^*^ he speaks also of the hu-tcheng or 
foreign rope, which has not been identified. ^'^ 

As to philosophical advance we have only here to remind our readers 
that it was in Ts'u that the famous Lao-tze is reputed to have flourished 
at first/12 

But it was not only in putting forward foreign things that the state 
of '1 s'd has played an important part in the history of China civilisa- 
tion. Material progress was actually made in the land. The Kieh or 
hooked spear was invented there about G90 b.c.^^^ ^ short time before 
500 the cross-bow was invented among the Ki-tze a native popula- 
tion, and soon attracted the attention of the Chinese. s^* 

211. In 546' B.C. a rather important tiling had been achieved in Ts'u. 
Wei-yen, Marshal of the Kingdom^^* had been commanded to make a 
complete survey of the lands and their products. Nothing so important 
had been done in the States since the days of the Til hmig and it was 
looked upon as a great achievement. It is most probable that a large 
part of it was embodied in the Sha7i Hai king ;^^^ and we consider as 
more probable still that the survey imitated by the Great Yli being thus 
recalled to mind and imitated, it was at this occasion that was erected 
for the first time the (original of the) famous tablet known as the 1 n~ 
scri ption of_r u-^J Comparative pala?ography permits to assign it to 
about that age. The wrigf>lirg shapes of the characters increased in the 
hand copies of subsequent times have nothing common with the Koh-tou 
or thick and thin strokes of the early writing •,^-^ they were simply the 
outcome of the ages on the inscribed stone.*^'' It was made partly of 
sentences taken from the .S'^m King.^^^. 



Notes 

787) Cf. Mayers, Ch. R.M. :509. 

788) Szema Ts'ien, She Ki, Ts'u she kia, 40. fol. 2.— I have just seen i. 
a note of Dr. J. Edkins, On the chronology of the Chu kivgdom (Chin. 
Rev. xvi, 305-6) that Yuen Shao (a.d. 160) tells us, in his Feng su 
tuvg. that the sovereigns of Chu, — or Ts'u, counted 04 generations from 
the Etnpeior Tcliucn Hiiih. to Fu-tchu, who was king when Ts'in Shi 
Hwang conquered his kingdom (223 B.C.). Counting 30 years a gen- 

^ erntion as usual with the ( hiiiese. it makes 2 143 B.C. This is an un- 
expected confirmation of my corrected scheme of chronology which 
acknowledges the, years 222o-2147 to Tchuen-hiiih. Cf. s^lprd note 
602, and injiii : chronological sketch. 



<:^ 



CHlNliSE CIVILISATION. 193 

789) Their language belonged to tlie Taic-slian family. Cf. Lfis Langues 
de la Chine, avant les Chnioise, §§ 31-33, L6-97, and addition 31, 
p. 14«. 

790) Cf. Mayers, C/t, R.N. 947. — There is a work existing still at pre- 
sent under his name which probably contains some of his views. 

791) (Jf. She King, V. ii, 3. 

792) Uniler the pretext that they were Man-y, i.e. Non-Chinese natives, 
and that they did not bear Chinese appellations, he gave to his three 
sons Roval titles, viz. Keu Tan Wang, Ngo Wang, and Yueh tchang 
Wang. *Cf. She Li, 40,3 /;. 

793) Cr. Tchun tsiu Tso tchvcu, Hi kiing ann. 1. — In the Shi lung, it 
is called King Ts'o. Cf. Chin. Class. IV, 644 ; V, J 34. 

794) In 821, a brother of Hiung siang settled among the Yung-pu, op- 
posite Tchung king, south of the Yaug-tze kiang. Cf. She ki, 
40, 4 V. 

795) Cf. Hoa HanshickW. 116 ; trad. Wylie, R.E.O., I, 2u3.— In678, 
it had become an important state. Cf. She ki, 40, 6. 

796) Hou /Jan shu, ibid, 

797) Tlie future Nan-yueh. Cf. Hou Han shu, ibid. — On the extensi^ n 
of Ts'u over 5000 li cf. Su-Ts'in, c. 333 b.c. in the She ki : T.P. 167. 
1 v.— 

798) CL supra §§199,202. ;« 

799) Cf, su.pra, par. 61 and seq., note 271 &c. 

800j The Tsu-ites were thus compelled in 294 b.c. to destroy the native 
state of Ye-laiig which stood on the way. 

801) Cf. supra, ch. VI, sect, e, div. III. par. 75. 

802) Cf. supra, note 2!0. 

803) I have given supra par. 75, 77 and notes 320, 321 the historical 
origin of that name, which has had nothing to do with the state of 
Ts'iN of Sheiisi. 

804) Cf. supra §§ 132-133. — It is not uninteresting to remark here that 
the first allusion about the three legged crow supposed to roost in the 
sun occurs in the Li sao of Kiii-yuen, the poet of Ts'u 314 B.C. in China, 
and that a three legged bird in various forms was figured on coins of 
Pamphylia and Lycia of older times, Comte Goblet d' Alviella has re- 
produced some of them in his interesting work on La Migration des 
St/mboles, 1891, p. 2-2. 

805) Cf. supra, note 490. For figures of the ivei kan pillars, cf. A, 
Colquhoun, Across Chrysi, II, 162, l38, 156, 161, 17^. 

306) The Kwei muh, 4212 — cl. 75 Bas., or Muh kwei ; on which see E. 
Bretschneider, Botanicim Sinicum. II, 247, 552.- Kwei or Kwei hwa 
4222-8344 Bas. was used for the Olea Jiugrans. (Cf. E. B., Bot. Sin 
I.e.) and thus appears in the Shan hai king, I, 1, on the Tehao-yao 
Mount which I susjiect was near Hang-tchou. The Si hai of the text 
(which has misled Prof. L. de Rosny, Chan Hai King, I, p. 5) is the 
Si hu, as shown by the names of the neighbouring mountains. — The 
Kwei n.uh, (hke the Kwei') is unknown to the Great Classics. It ap 
pears i i the Shan Hai King, II, 7, v. about a mountain of N. Kwang- 
si. It "s spuken of in the Er-ya, in Tchwang-tze, Su Tsin, Hwai 
wan-tze, &c. The Kao-sia-forest, or Cinnamon-tree forest, Kwei-lin, 
which has given its name to the site in 214 B.C.. is still at present 
that of the capital of Kwang-si, is spoken of in a later book of the 



194 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

Shan Hni King, x, 1 v. 

807) Cf. Lieh sien tchuen, 1st cent, b.c, ; T. P. 957, 5 v.— We have 
had already occasion to speak of that remarkable man, cf. note 744 
and text. 

808) Tlie question here is particularly interesting because ot the Cinna- 
mon of Exnd. XXX, 23 ; Pror). vii, 17 ; Song of Sol. iv, H, and of the 
Cassia of Ps. xlv, 8, which had been erroneously supposed to have 
come from China, while there is no doubt that they were impDrted from 
the Malabar Coast and from Ceylon, where they grow naturally. The 
Kassia as a cheaper and coarser kind would be that of the continent 
which for long was wrongly supposed to be a distinct speoies, as stated 
by A. de Candolle, Origin of Calttvatecl Plants, p. 146. Fhickiger 
and Hanbury have thoroughly investigated the matter in their Phnr- 
maconraphia, or History of tlie I rincipal Drugs of vegetable Origin, 
p. 4(57 sq. — The word Kinnamnn is traceable to the Sincrhalese Ka- 
ki/nnama. As to cassia it has come through the Septuagint from the 
hebrew which means ' cutt off.' 

809) It has been translated into French by the late Marquess D'Hervey 
St. Denys in 1 '70. 

810 ; Cf- E. Brbtschneider, Botanicum Sinicum, II, 552. 

811) CF. E. B., Bot. Sin., II, 420. 

812) C'f. SM/);-a, note 50 j. 

813) Cf. 7"so tchuen, ann. 600. — Chin. Class. V, 77. — Fan-li, when min- 
ister to Yaeh, 493-473 B.C. is attributed the invention of a catapulte 
throwing stones of 12 pounds at 400 pace^. Cf. Khang-hi tze tien, s.v. 
pao, 11.; + 16. — Pellet-bows had been invented about 607 B.C. Cf. 
following note. 

814) On Bow, Composite Bow, Pellet Bow, and Cross-how. The B o w- 
an (i-A r r o w are not a weapon so primitive in its character that it 
may have been invented anywhere. Comparative etlinography shows 
to this effect that not a few nations and populations hav never been 
acquainted with it. (Cf. Lane Fox, Catalog. Anthrop. Collect., 1877, 
p 41 -45). Three different sorts of bows have appeared in Antiquity. 1<^ 
The Arcus, or plain Bow, made of a single piece in one bend : 2*^ the 

Angular B iw, apparently made of two pieces, of the Egyptians and 
Assyrians, and pr >bably tlie antecedent of the following ; '6^ the Com- 
posite bow, mide of wood, horn, glue and sinews, of which tliere were 
two sorts, a the Greek bow, or Cupid's bow, forming a doub e arch, 
used by Partliians, Daces and generally near the Black sea ; not- 
witiistanding the adverse opinion of Theocritus and Locrophron who 
dis iuguished them, it seems doubtful that when unstrung the Greek 
bow should have differed much of the: b the Scythi in bow, forming a 
C in its backward curve when unstrung. This peculiarity is noted in 
Her idotu?, vii, 69, of Arab's bows ; and may be seen atKarrak with 
the biws of captives made by Sheshcmk (Rawlinson, Her. iv. 64). The 
Composite Bow appears on monuments of Anterior Asia as early 
as the old carved slabs of Telloh. and it was that same bow which the 
civilised B.ik Sings carried with tliem to Eastern Asia. It was that 
sort of bow which was pictured by the old Babylonian symbol writing 
nsod for it, still recognizable in its descendant the Chinese character 
Kiing. rCf. The old Chinese characters and their earl// Chinese deri- 
vates § 42). The Arcus or plain bow was known in pre-Chinese Chiu.-^ 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 195 

among the natives of the East, the Y, whose name was written with a 
symbol meaning pictorially the Great Bow-men. The must famous 
makers of Arrows were the Y-mou of Shantung, according to tlic She 
pen. Curiously enough one of the mythical inventors of the Bow, in 
the Shin Hai kiiKL ('xviii, 5 and gloss.), ^vas named P'rin which is the ^ 
word for I3f»w, in Akkadian, in Malay, &c. — A Kiiit, (4 868 Bas.) sort 
of thimble or ring fitted on the thumb was used to assist in drawing 
the bow. (Cf. Shi I'^iny, II, iii, Ode 5, Kiu Jcuvg) as in Assyro-Baby- 
lonia (cf. Perrot-Chi|.iez, Hist. Art. Antiq.ll, fig. 5 of Assurbauipal) 
must have been brought from the west in China by the Bak Sings 
along with the composite bow. On the early knowledge of the im- 
plement at the time of Hwang-ti and of Shun, of. note 1 C3 audits 
add. in the present work). — Two improvements were made among the 
Chinese and Non-Chinese, the fan or pellet-bow and the Nu or 
Cross-bow. — P, The t^an (264.0 Bas.) is a bow with a socket fixed 
on the string for holding bullets or pellets, whence its name. It 
was used in 607 B.C. at first as an amusement, by the Duke Ling 
of TsiN (Shansi ) and was an introduction of Tung-tze, or , iu Tung, 
his minister. (Cf. I'so tchuen VII, ii, 4 ; Han shi ivai tchuen ; Shi 
shivoh; Tai j^i'W yii hni, kiv. 350, fol. 6 veis. ; (55, fol. 6 vejs.) 
Pan Tchao the famous general of the first century, sent in 74 a.d., 
36 men to Xhotan to practise arrows and pellet-bows. {T.P.Y.L. 
350-6). Besides China, it is now used'by Afghans and others in the 
North-west of India, where it is called gulel. (Cf. Wilbraham Eger- 
ton, An illuslrated Handbook of Indian arms, 1880, p. 130, and LaHe 
Fox, CataL, p. 52).— 2^ The Nn (2631 Bas.) ideographically the 
enslaved bow, once called also Kiii-shu (10663-cl. 202, or 11420' 
el. 202, Bas.), by the Non-Chinese, which is still preserved in the 
Tibetan, gzu. Its first appearance was made among the Ki tze 
man (10316-cl. 39-9633 Bas.) a native tribe of West Hunan 
on the borders of Ts'u, in the sixth century b.c. Through Sun- 
Wu ihe miUtary author of 500 B.C. (supra note 667) and subsequent 
writers, it became soon famous because it permitted to shoot an arrow 
at 600 double-paces. (Cf. T.P.Y.L., 348, 1-82) ; She ki, 7G, 2 ; 65» 
2), —The crossbow does not seem to have been known in Homan Europe- 
before the sixth century a. p. (Cf. E. B. Tyler, Anthropoloffi/, p. 196). 
The Lateran council of 1139 forbade its use as being too muiderous ., 
a weapon for christians to employ against one another, and Anna 
Comnena who described it said that " a truly diabolical affair it is." — 
Cn)?sbows are still characteristic weapons of many of the wilder tribe) 
of Chin-India and of non-Chinese parts of China, (Cf. W. Egerton,. 
o.c, pp. 85-87 for details, and also H. Yule, Marco-Polo, II, 67-68 ) 

815) 2'so tchuen, Siang kung, xxv, 9. 

816) Cf. suprd, note 91 and add. 

817) On this tablet cf. in favour of its autlienticitv ; Amiot. J. HagiT 
(1802j, J. Klaproth (13in, G. Panthier (1868; ; and against it: .L 
Legge. (1865), W. H. ]\Iedhurst (^l868j, Chrisiopher^T. Gardner 
(1864). Nothing shows it to be the clumsy foigery of a Taoist under 
the Han dynasty which Dr. J. Legge declares it to be. Copies and 
copies of copies only exist at ])reseiit, and tliey represent clearly in my 
opinion a genuine inscription of circa 500 cc, partly defaced and eatea 
up by ages. 



196 ORIOrN OF THE EARLY 

818) On tlie Koh ton. cf. i^upra ti. 76. 

819) Cf, tlie same elTect on ancient; texts, in tlie native collections of 
inscriptions. 

820) Cf. Shu King, II, iv, X. 

c. Tlie State of Shuh (Szetclmen.) 
212. ^y^ have had occasion in a previous part of tlie present \voi"k,"^ 
when enquiring abotit the channels of introduction of foreign civilisation, 
in China, to speak of the trade of Shuh^^^ aQ(j of the state of the same 
name, the fiist king of whom claimed an Indian descent, and was ruling 
in 475 B.C.S2 3 He was succeeded by some other Kai-mings^^'^ or Rulers, 
the last of whom named Tze-kwei Kai-ming was on the throne in 324 
B.C. when the king of Ts'i.v by superchery succeeded in conquering the 
country, 8-5 or at least submitting it under liis protectorate.^*® 

The Indian descent here referred to deserves more than a passing re- 
marlv as previously done. Some more fragments of the native history of 
the kings of Sze-tchuen, Shuh Wang pen kl by Yang-hiung (5:5 b.c. — 
A.D. 3 8), which had escaped my attention before, are most important on 
these intercommunications, because they permit us to determine the date 
when they began, and that of the cave remains of West China. 

213. According to the native history, the oldest masters of the coun- 
try were the Ts'an-tsung or gatherers of silk-worms, the J cheh Jcwan or 
Breakers or the Bushy-forests, and the Yu yh or Fish traders ; after- 
wards the Kai-inings.^^'^ Then came Peh yung, or Baron Yung, and 
after iiim Yii wei and Wei tien who settled in thn hills of the 'fsien river 
and lived there as the first Anachorets {sien).^-^^ After them there was 
a king named fu-yiX coming from India.^29 A daughter of the chief- 
tain of Tchu-she,^^^ whose name was Li and who was coming from the 
sources of the Klang, became his wife, and then he assumed the Royal 
dignity with the title of Wang-Ti or Expecting Emperor, and estab- 
lished his residence in Pi yh, or city of the tablet, (the later Tcheng-tic). 

214. The foregoing statement about the anachorets is most interest- 
ing as the first historical information about the once inhabited hermit-caves 
■of the Min river. The Tsien shan lies near the upper course of the 
Min.ssi- JQ i\^Q neighbourhood of Li -fang which Capt. W. Gill visited in 
1873 when travelling in N.W. Szetchuen, and where he saw a great many 
caves on the sides of" the hills.^^^ Now as to the date. The history 
says that these first anachorets came after Feh yung, one of the historical 
rulers. It just happens that we hear of this Baron Yung in the class- 
ics.*33 Xn 611 B.C., as he had led a conspiration of native Man tribes 



CHlNESi; CIVILISATION. 19? 

against the state of Ts'u, his state was destroyed, ^^* and he was compelled 
to flee westwards, in Shuh where he established a new state as the native 
history tells us. 

And as to the arrival of these anachoretS; the statement of the Shuh 
wang pen ki is supported by some further evidence in the historical lit- 
erature. For instance the Yii twel king and the Yh tchou tchi, des- 
cription of Szetchuen, two ancient works, record tbat Recluses (sien) were 
established in caves of the Mount of Tsing tcheng (in the modern pre- 
fecture of Kia-ting, on the Min river) at the time of the six Kingdoms, 
i.e. 481 B.C. 835 The region of Tso, near the present Tatsienlu or Darchiendo 
of W. Szetchuen was reputed in 97 b.c. to be since ages productive of 
the shin-yoh, the divine drug (of immortahty) on Mount Shantu which 
was also inhabited by Recluses. 836 

215. Therefore we know, as the outcome of the previous paragraphs 
that in the first half of the 6th century B.C. some hermits, or Sien, i.e. 
Richis, came and settled in N. W. Szetchuen, in the vicinity of the central 
route of the Shuh traders with India. 83'' This date coincides with a visi- 
ble influence of India on China, and the same century saw the arrival of 
Lao-tze with a certain baggage of Indian views, 

216- Several of these caves, cut in the hills in a remarkable manner 
have been visited by European travellers. It seems that their former oc 
cupants were ignorant as yet of the art of writing ; carved ornaments 
representing the vadjra, the trisula, the sun, and the existence therein of 
large water basins for ablutions purpose suggest and confirm the Hindu- 
ism or Brahmanism of these Anachorets. They continued to be inhabited 
thus for long and finally some of them and similar other ones were oc- 
cupied by Buddhist, and by natives. They are commonly called Man- 
tze caves because of the latter circumstance and the Non-Chinese character 
of their occupants. *38 

217. It is in the usual sequence of events that these anachoretes and 
proselytisers should not have come and settled in the country of Shuh 
otherwise than by a well known trade route and on the trail of traders. 
Their arrival in the sixth century implies the existence of the trade route 
through Patna, S adiya and Da r chie ndo some time earlier.^^s 
We have been able in previous pages of the present work to adduce some 
evidence of the activity of the merchants of S h uh in several directions 
west and south-west. The import of Tibetan Mastiffs (ngao) by trav- 
ellers, ^*° about 1105 B.C., which concerns most probably the eastern por- 
tion of that route, is the oldest instance known, and concurs with the 



198 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

preciteil circumstances. Jujube, Peach, Abricot, &c. were carri'ed by their 
trade inland. (^Supra ch. VI, sect, a) to the N.W. of India. Wild-silk 
and woollen cloth of Shuh, curious bamboo staves of ktung, precious furs 
of Hukwang, and special ironware of Liang (N. of Shuh) became grad- 
ually regular articles of trade of these merchants of Shuh to "West India 
across the S.E. corner of Tibet.^^J- We have no precise data as to its 
actual beginning, but it cannot be, according to probabilities much later 
than 650 B.C. It was through their channel that were introduced in 

thp west and in the centre of China several innovations rather character- 
istic of their origin which he have previously mentioned.^ -^ 

218. While dealing with the imports and exports which took place 
through this trade route between China and India during that period, we 
must necessarily mention the question of the South A9oka or Mauriya 
written characters. The North Indian writing, a;lso called Bactro-Pali 
is based undoubtedly on the Semitic writing, probably, on that which was 
employed in Ancient Persia, and was introduced by Cyras in North-India 
as tradition suggests. It was there subsequently brought to perfection 
by the Brahmans. The South- A^coka, so-called, although brought like- 
wise to perfection by the same systematizers, rests on a different basis. 
Various attempts have been made to find this basis in South-Arabian and 
others characters. But they have proved to be complete failures, which 
further enlightenment from recent researches shows to be greater than 
were supposed at first.^^^ Traders can ill afford to manage their business 
without writing^ and the travelling merchants of the country of Shuh, 
where Chinese script was known, cannot have journeyed then into India, 
where on the contrary the art of writing was still unknown, without hav- 
ing introduced for their business transactions, some of their own writlen 
characters. This they could do easily with their most simple symbols and 
the syllabic sounds inherent to them, as has been the case in China when 
dealing with foreigners in later times. Such for instance the Tsuan or 
Lolo characters framed in a.d. 9, or before,^'^* the Yao Shuikia and Miao- 
tze characters in the South-west ;*^5 the small characters of the Djur- 
tchens,8-^ and others. Now a classification of the Chinese characters in 
the tchuen style^-^^ current during that period, such as made in the Shwoh 
wen vocabulary of the first century,^^^ shows that among the numerous 
characters, most generally cumbrous and complicated in form, there was 
a comparatively small number of them, about a hundred, quite simple and 
most convenient for use. And a close comparison of the Indian charac- 
ers, in shape and sound with these elementary Chinese symbols shows 



CHIHESE CIVILISATION, 199 

in 32 cases out of 34 such resemblances and similarities, that it is most 
difficult to believe that the Hindu Brahmans have not availed theu.selveg 
of the Rude writing of these merchants, ns a material already known, to 
make out of it, with improve iients imitated from the Northern alphabet, 
the so-called South A9oka characters. ^*^ 



Notes 

821; Cf. supra. -pv. 46, 52, 55. 

822) Shuh, Shuk, 9i57 Bas., now written eye (cl. 109) bundle (cl. 20) 
and warm (cl. 142) arranged in a single group-character, was originally 
written wo r m, TSHn(7 (cl. 142) under k/>??, 1 oo ki n g, thus making 
a phonetic suggestion ts-k. Cf. Min Ts'i-kih, Luh shu tiing, ix, 10. 

823) As shown by the complimentary mission he sent to Li kung, Duke 
of Ts'rN, at tho occasion of his accession to the throne in 476 B.C. — 
The year 265 of p. 52 was a misprint. 

82 i) Kai-ming was a title, not a proper name as mistaken supra p. 52. 
An its connection with the nanifl of the Kuen-mings, cf. infra. ^ 

825) The superchery consisted in the offer by the king of Ts'in to that ) 
of is'u, of five stone oxeji about which the Tsinites had reported the T 
wonderful story that soms gold (secretly placed there at night) found j 
every morning under their J^l, was really made by them. The king of 
Shuh invited to take them away if he choosed, was compelled to open 

a route across the Kiu-lung range, to do it. The Ts'inites afterwards 
availed themselves of the passage hitherto impracticable and their army 
conquered the country. — Cf. Yang-hiuug, Shuh wang pen ki : T.P. 
900, 2. In 1868, Alexander Wylie bas travelled through tho same 
road which he has carefully described in his Notes on a journey from 
Ching-tao to Han-how, Proc. Rog. Geo. Soc, June 7th 1870, p. 175- 
9. It is known as the Shlh niu tao, the Stone-Oxen Road. 

826) As shown supra, p. 52. 

827) Tliis paragraph is intended to replace the lines 2-7 of page 52 
whicli contain several misapprehensions. 

S2S j The Chinese text there is extremely concise : Yii-wei Wei-tien Yii 
T-^icn shau teh sien, but I think the statement is clear enough. Cf, 
T.P.Y.L.. 166, 3 V. 

829) Cf. supra note 263. 

830) Tchu she was the name of a locality famous for its silver mires. 
S.W. of Y-pin liien in Szetchuen. (Cf. G. Playfair, The cities and 
towns of China, Nos, li70, 8574) near Sin tchou. — The Min river 
was for long supposed to form the head waters of the Kiang, and is 
marked Ta kiang on the ancient maps of the contending states period. 
Cf. the Lth tat ti li yen koh in, 

831) Cf. Khang hi tze tien. s.v. 'J'sien, S5 + 9, ful. 77. — The Tsien Han 
shu, Ti li tchi, says : In the Shuh province, district of Mien-se, (he 
I'sien river flows from the Yi'i lei hills.— Mien-se is at present the dis- 
trict of Wen tchuen, in Mou tchou of N.W. Szetchuen. 

83J) The River of Golden Sand, 1880, vol. I, p. 346-353. 
833) The Shri, King, Speech at Mub, v, ii, 3, enumerates the Yun 
among the native tribes, who came to the help of the Tchoo when th? 



200 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

conquered Cliiiifi. They were settleil 'near tlie present Yun-yang, in 

N.W. Hupeli, not far from the Iviu-hiny range ..ud the N.E. of 

Szetchutn. 
834) Tchuii Tsiii, T,so tchiieri,Wen kung, xvi, G. 
8;:'5) T<ti ping yil Ian, Kiv. 44, fol. 4 v. 
83G) Iloa Hun shit, Kiv. IIG. — We shall hear of them under the She 

Hwang-ti, Cf. helow. 

837) Tlieir influx must have lasted for several centuries as tliey settled 
also on the cliffs of the Kia-line:, and Wu rivers. 

838) Cf. A. Wylie O.C. {supra^l^. 825).— W. Gill, O.C. {supra n. 
832). — E. Colborne Baber, Trai'els and Researches In Western China, 
1S82, >p, 129-111. — F.S.A. Bourne, Report of a Journey in South- 
western China, 1888.— E. C. Baker has studied several of these caves 
with his usual carefulness, and has published plans and drawings. 

839) On this route cf. supra § 56 and notes 244-7 ; also § 55 and 
notes 238-243, 

840) Cf. supra, note 243 on the meaning of liu. 

841) Tcliang Kien, in Ta-Hia, 128 b.c. C^ot 125^, saw there only the 
bamboo staves and the ;>((7j of Shah. {Sup. n. 249-251). The Clii- 
n3se word may be singular or plnral, and the vagueness of the term, in- 
stead of she easier precision if one sort of cloth only had been spoken 
of, suggests that he meant the two well known sorts of cloth made 
in the Shuh country. The woollen cloth was called mao-yii, litt. hair- 
feathers (cloth). The wild-silk could not be the object of a great de- 
mand because of the somewhat similar tusser (not tussah) silk of l^orth 
India. As to the fine silk cloth of the East of China, it could not 
be exported at first by that route, and does not seem to have been so 
before the Han period. Silk culture was introduced from the East 
in the ^gean isle of Cos before the overthrow of Darius and seems 
to have flourished until about 222 a.d., when it ceases to be spoken of 
In history. (Cf. S. Reinach, Philo. Glass. (2) I, 255, 4. — S. Sharpe, 
History of Egypt, I, 263.— Edw. Balfour, Cyclop. Ind., I, 819). Their 
silkworms fed en cypress-turpentine-, ash-, and oak-trees (Flin. xi, 
17). On the silkworms of Cos, cf. also. Aristotle, Hist. An. v. 19, 
17 ; 11, 6, and Plin. xi, 26 (22). It is said that their cocoons were 
first wowen in the said island by Pamphile, daughter of Plates. (Cf. 
G. Birdwood, Indian Arts, 267). — Silk industry in the island has sur- 
vived or has been revived to the present day, and is the object of a 
yearly export of £50000 — in Roman times, the insufficiency of 
local production in quality and quantity led to the importation there 
of plain silk-stuffs of China which were split and rewoven. (Cf . on 
the latter question. F. Hirth, Chi?ia and the Roman Orient, 256-60"). — 
The silk -worms of Cos did not belong to the mulberry-feeding, but 
to the oak feeding sort ; therefore to that which is still at present 
abundant in Szetchnen, with an important market at Pao-ning fii ; 
(cl. Silt-China, Imperial maritime Customs, 1381, p. 8). It was in 
the vicinity of the head quarters of the Ancient trade route we are 
speaking of. — A sort of cloth, or textile stuff called Sindhu is men- 
tioned in cuneiform inscriptions ; for instance on a list of cloths of the 
time of Assurbanipal (b.c. 668-625), perhaps a copy of an older list, 
and on a tablet of 576 B.C. under Nebuchadnezzar, were four manas 
of sindhu are handed over to the workman {pl.^B.&O.R., iv, 57). This 



CHINESE CIVILISATION'. 201 

suggests an unwoven stuff, not necessarily valuable. Wool and Iron were 
likewise weighed by Manas. (Cf. T. G. Pinches, B.&O.R., i, 9 ; and 
Guide Nimroud, 119). The word is written ideographically " striped- 
or ribbed-cloth," and thus far cannot be muslin of Sindhu, or India 
(as suggested by Prof. A. H. Sayce, Relig. Anc. BabyL, p. 13S) 
where no such thing was made at the time. The industry began 
much later in Muaslipatani. Moreover there are two fatal objections; 
the Sindhu is described as a cloth of the mountains (gurri) showing 
that it came through an inland route, or more probably that it was 
made inland. (Cf. Parsindu, a town of Namri in the inscriptions of 
Assurnazirpal) ; the other objection is the equation A=s which could 
not have been avoided by a land route from India, as shown by the 
Hldu on the Darius inscription of Naksh-i-Rustam, Hoddu in Esther, 
i, 1 and viii, 9. — The resemblance with Slndu, India, is a coincidence, 
as the word is not isolated in the Assyrian vocabulary, (cf. Brunnow's 
List, Nos. 1799, 1951, 4776, 5500, &c.) and is probably cognate with 
the Egyptian sent sentu (cf. Paul Pierret, Vocah. Hierogl 512), — As 
to a suggested connection witli the sindon of the Bible, I think that 
the latter is decidedly Egyptian in origin. Cf. Suten in P- Pierret 
V.H. 564. — The forgoing reasons show an impossibility in interpreting, 
Sindiihj silk, as has been suggested also. (Cf. sw^m n. 42 b-30). — 
The sherikotJi of Isaiah, 19, 9, refers decidedly not to silk. 

842) Cf. supra par. 2 09. 

843) Cf. supra, note 419. — It is unnecessary to quote here the unsuc- 
cessful essays of A. Weber, I. Taylor, J. Halevy, &c. — For the 
Northern writing cf. T. de L.. Did Cyrus introduce ivriting into In- 
dia? (B. & 0. R., Feb. 1887, I, 58, 4. 

844) Cf. Miao Man hoh tchi, ii, 2. — Yun-nan Vung tchi : Nan Man 
tchi, 31, i, 4 v.; 32. ii, 13. — Also, G. Deveria, Les Lolas et les Miao- 
tze : J. A, 1891- — I have myself found 450 different signs on Lolo 
Mss. — 376 different characters were all those that a LoLman could 
remember, at the invitation of Consul F. S. A. Bourne. Cf. the list 
in his Report of a Journey in South-western China \ Parliamentary 
Papers, 188?, China s.c. 5371. 

845) Cf, T. de L., A new loriting from South Western China: The 
Academy, 19 Febr. 1887. — And G. Deveria, Les Lolas, p. 15. 

846) Cf. F. Hirth, The Chinese Oriental College, Shanghai, 1887.— G. 
Deveria, Examen de la stele de Yen-fai ; dissertation sur les carac- 
teres d' e'criture emplayes par les Tartares Jou-tchen ; 18^2. — T. deL,, 
The Djurtchen of Mandshuria : their name, language and litera- 
ture; J.R.A.S. 1889. 

847) Cf. s%pra n. 376 on the tchuen styles of writing. 

848) Compiled in a,d. 89-99 on Imperial Command, by the famous 
Hii shen. 

949) This question forms the object of a special paper of mine OnlndO' 
Chinese elements in the formation of the South-Aqoka alphabet. 



Chap, VII. — Sixth Period : 221 b.c— a.d. 220. 
Sect. A. The Empire. 

219. After over a century of uninterrupted war of a most sanguinary 
character, the state of Ts'iN^^^ established at last its sway all over the 
Chinese dominion^^i^ and in 221 b.c. Wang Tcheng in the 26th year of 
his reign assumed the title of She Hwang-ti, intended to mean the First 
Universal Emperor. The policy of general conquestssshad been initiated 
by Tchao Siang "Wang, 306-250 B,c., and it may be asked if the fame of 
the extensive conquests of Alexander the Great did not give an impetus 
to the natural ambition of the Ts'inite princes. 8^3 Anyhow the unity of 
government with a centraUsed administration, and the progressive assimi- 
lation of the various parts of the country changed henceforth the condi- 
tions in which foreign influences could be felt in the Flowery Land. The 
personal character and turn of mind of the autocratic sovereign for the 
time being could but have thenceforth a peculiar importance for outside- 
relations according to his sympathy or dislike for novelties and foreign 
things. 

220. Two great Emperors have shone and left an imperishable mark 
during this period, the last that can concern the present work. Ts'in 
She Hwang-ti founder of the Empire on pr inciples somewhat differing 
from those of respectful tradition which had hitherto obtained in Chinese 
surroundings, and Han Wu-ti who first opened relations with foreign 
countries by all the means in his power. 

It is interesting for us here to know from recorded history where from 
She Hwang-ti derived the un-Chinese proclivities which he displayed more 



204 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

specially after 237 b.c. on the counsels of his minister Li-sze, when the 
latter was promotedto a higher rank than he occupied previously.'*^ The 
king of Ts'iN, Wang Tcheng as he was then called, conceived an aversion 
against foreigners, and in the aforesaid year issued an edict in order to 
shut his kingdom to them. Li-sze himself a native of Ts'u and a pupil 
of the known Taoszeist Sun-k'ing, protested openly against it and 
the reasons put forward in his memorial to the throne convinced the 
sovereign who cancelled his order.' ^* 

221. Li-sze began in reminding his sovereign of the useful services 
which his predecessors had derived from foreigners, and of the precious 
things and curios which he would not get anymore from foreign parts. 
The list he gave of these things is peculiarly instructive. He said that 

y^ His majesty obtained: Jade from the Kwen mountains (i.e. from Khotan, 
gloss.*^'^) ; moreover that he had the jewel of Sui Ho (otherwise Pien 
Ho, 85'' which afterwards was made into the State Seal by She Hwang-ti 
himself, gloss.) ; pendant pearls of Ming-yueh^^^, swpids of Tal-ngo^^^, 
which he wore, horses of Ts'ien-li^^ which he rode ; banners ornamented 
with king fishers feathers.s^iand drunis of the Ju en, Shu and Ling patterns 
in skin of iguana,*^- made on his command; all rare things which the 
Ts'iN territory did not produce. Continuing his enumeration, Li-sze 
mentioned rings of Ye-Jcwang gem,^^^ artichs in ivory and rhinoceros horn, 
^^^ nice gir]^ from Tcheng and Wei (E. Honan), stately and good Kiilh- 
ti horses.of the North, ^^^ and gold and silver of the South of the Iviang, 
which could not be got anymore ; vermilion and green paint of west 
Shuh which it would no more be possible to gather,^^° hair-pins in pearl 
from Wan (Honan), earrings in pendant-pearls, undyed silk cloth, and 
embroidered ornaments, ^'''^ which would not be procurable as before. 86S Qji 
the eighteen articles enumerated there, it can be seen that no less than 
eight were introduced by the trade from foreign and distant lands ; all 
the others were obtainable in China proper though not in the Ts'iN 
-V dominion. 

222. Li-fze was then promoted to a superior rank and acquired a great 
influence on his Royal Master, a prince of great energy and skill whom 
he converted to his views. 

It was with the help of his able minister that Ts'iN Wang Tcheng 
proceeded as much by the force of his well organized armies as by politi- 
cal ability to complete the conquest of the six other Chinese States. One 
of the most clever steps to that effect was the adoption within the 
various parts of his actual dominion of an uniform style of writing the 



CHlNES-i: CIVILISATIOK. 205 

Tchueii characters,8s%bbreviated and siuiplified in a filiform way. This was 
in 227 B.C., and Li-sze was himself the principal author of this new style 
called Siao tchuen.^''^ Fifteen years later, the hair pencil had been con- 
siderably improved by the general Meng-tien, and by the increase in the 
number of characters, so many variants had occurred that it became neces- 
sary to adopt a new style of writing which was the Li shu,^'^^ made of 
strokes thick and thin according to the convenience of the brush pencil 
for rapidity. 

223. Acting on the advice and with the help of his faithful minister, 
the king of Ts'in assumed in 221 b.c. the Imperial authority and selected 
for his future denomination She Hwang-ti, probably in imitation (we do 
not suggest it without diffidence) of the name of Iskander whose fame as 
we know was echoed in the remotest corners of Asia, s 72 and whom he 
seems to have imitated in several of his deeds. He divided his Empire 
in 36 provinces.873 Iq 214 b_c,, to guard his dominion from Tartar in- 
vasions, he decreed the building of a line of'deiensive works from Lin-tao 
(S.W. Kansuh) to Liao-tung in the N.E., utilising for the purpose such 
previous works built successively since 359 b.c. by several of the Chi- 
nese princes in the North, as well as the precipitous hills, water-courses 
and ravines on the borders.^' < General Meng-tien, residing in Shang 
Kiwi i.e. N.E. Shensi, was put in command there for over ten years, and 
built series of earth-works, which in later years, repaired and in some 
places built in full became the Great wall of China.^' 5 [t grew in repute 
as in material importance and it became identified by a geographical 
dislocation in the minds of western Orientals with the long famed Wall 
of Gog and Magog. {Sadd Yddudj wa Madjudj)J^^ 

224. In 213, three years before bis death, She Hwang-ti decreed the 
Burning of the Books. In view of putting an end to the incessant com- 
plaints of the literati that he did not follow the ways of Antiquity, he 
approved of a report of his Premier Li-sze, of which the following is the 
most important part: "I pray that all the Records in charge of the 
Historiographers be burned, excepting those of Ts'in ; that, with the ex- 
ception of those officers belonging to the Board of great scholars, all through- 
out the Empire who presume to keep copies of the She King or of the 
Shu King, or of the discourses'^' of the various schools, be required to go 
with them to the officers in charge of the several districts, and burn them; 
*hat all who may dare to speak together about the She and the Shu 
be cast away on the market place ; that those who make mention of the 
past, soa? to blame the present, be treated likewise with their relatives ; 



206 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

that officers who shall know of the violation of those rules and not in- 
form against the offenders, be equally guilty with them ; and that whoever 
shall not have burnt their books within thirty days after the issuing of 
the ordinance, be branded and sent to labour on the great walls. The 
only books which should be spared are those on medecine and drugs, 
divination and augury, seeds and trees." 

The decree was strictly put in force but not for long,' 7 8 as it was 
neither renewed nor repealed by the successor of She Hwang-ti, 210 b.c, 
A great deal of harm was certainly done to literature, though not so much 
as could have been feared, considering that the edict was not officially 
cancelled before 23 years, i.e. in 191 b.c. Much of the Confucian litera- 
ture against which it was specially directed, escaped through the reten- 
tive memory of the literati and the numerous finds of hidden copies of 
the forbidden books. 8^9 In 209 b.c. a large part of the country had 
ceased to recognize^?*^ the yoke of the Ts'rs dynasty, and therefore its 
literary proscriptions. The wreck of Chinese literature is due as much 
if not much more to the havoc of ages and to the four great bibliotecal 
catastrophes which occurred in the following centuries,"^ than to the 
Burning of the Books. 

225, Like Alexander the great with the Avestic Nasks on medicine and 
astronomy r(?) She Hwang-ti had excepted from the fire, the books on 
medicine and astrology, 8*2 gome 120 years after him. It can hardly be 
doubted that the founder of the Chinese Empire was acquainted with 
some circumstances concerning the Macedonian conqueror. 

As we have said before She Hwang-ti had become deeply imbued with the 
ideas and novelties of the Neo-Taoists.^^^ In several occasions we hear 
of his relations with them, and of their excentricities which he adopted' 
In 219 he sent an expedition's 4 from Tsihmoh in search of the Three 
fortunate islands and of the drug of immortality ;^S5 and in 201 B.C., 
dissatisfied with the failure ofsss ^^jg attempts made to that effect, he 
went himself along the sea-shore and partly by sea in the hope of being 
more successful, from Kiang-tch'eng^s^ to Lang-ya (Tsihmoh) and died 
soon afterwards. 

226. Disorders followed his death as could be expected after an imperial 
reign of only twelve years, and no less than eighteeu different states'^ s 
arose on the ruins of the Empire he had founded for 10000 years, but 
which his weak son and successor was unable to keep together. In 206, 
but exactly in 202 b.c. the Han dynasty began to reign over the Empire 
once again united under one sway, with a glory and power which have 



CHItTKSE CIVIMSATION. 207 

not been suipassed. Tlic Chinese dominion was extcutlccl in the west 
so far as Transoxiana, and in the sonth included Tungking, while con- 
terminons states acknowledged its suzerainty. Intercommunications were 
opened everywhere available, and tlie ancient history of China thus comes 
to an end. 

Notes , 

850) AsTs'iN has long been supposed to have given its nameto China, let 
ns remark that in the Annamese history where archaic names are pre- 
served, tliis state and its sliort lived dynasty are called Tan ; aiul as 
tlie name of China originate 1 with ilie Southern trade as shown by 
several scholars, the supposition must be given up for ever as contrary 
to historical evidence, cf. supra, n. 330 ; and P. J.B. Truong Vinh-ky, 
Histoire Annamite, I., IG, for the sound of the name, 

851) According to the figures given in the She Ki of Szema Tsien, kiv, 
XV., the Ts'inites would have butchered some 1500000 people during 
the struggle. Some of the figures making this total are obviously 
exas:gerated. 

852) An Imperial spirit of general conquest is attributed to Huan Kung 
of Ts'i in the 7th cent, cf . an extrac*^ from Kiran-t:e, in China Revieiv 
xviii., 196. 

853) We give below reasons to believe that it was really so. 

854) Li-sze was a native of TVu_jind a pupil of the famous Taoszeist o 
Sun-k'ing disciple of Tsou-yen. (Cf. supra § 173). He went to 
Ts'iN before the accession of Wang Tcheng the future Ts'in She 
Hwang-ti. In 237 b.c. he was sncce?sful in decidmg the king to with- 
draw a decree of expulsion against foreigners. In his memorial he 
mentions several instances where foreigners had proved useful to his 
predecessors, notably that of You-iju (6171-170 Bas.) a Jung by birth 
whose advices were followed by Muh Kung and enabled him to con- 
quer vast lands over 20 tribes of Western Jung Tartars {^She Kiy 
87, 3, and 5. l-t) about 626 b.c. 

855) Cf. De Mailla, Histoire genevale de la Chine, 11, 383. 

856) '1 his is a direct confirmation of the Jade traffic which lias often 
been spoken of in the present work. Cf. p. 31 and pass. 

857) On the history of this gem discovered in the Sth century n.c. Cf. 
Mayers, Chinese R.M., i, 393,551. It was probably a piece of Jade 
which had come to Ts'u througli the traders of Shuh, — An alleged 
figure of this seal is thoroughly Persian. 

858) Cf. supra Note 871. 

859) This was a name for sv^ords made of iron tempered in the Lung' 
tsiuen or Dragon source (of Si Ping, Yu-ning fu, Honan). They are 
enumerated in the biography of Su Tsin, 4th cent. B.C., {She Ki, 69, 
9) witli those of Wei made at Ming shan, the Moh-ya swords of Meih- 
yang, and the deadly ones of the Teng state, all permitting to cut 
across in two, at one blow, a bull or a horse. — On Moh-ya cf. supra 
par. 185 ; oniSu Ts'in, note 73C.. 

860) The horses "of Ts'ien-li like those of Pu Sliao, N. Shansi were a fine 
breed of horses. Cf. T. de L., Earliest Horse-riding in Western and 
Eastern Asia : B.&O.R., 1893, vi, 200 and supra par. 197, 



■208 OIUOIN OF THE EARLY 

«61) Ts\ii feini tchi H, 8253-1239?,-41-3852 Bas.— Tlie ts'ui or king 
fisher a southern hird said to have been first seen when some were pre- 
sented to TcHoc Tcheng Wang from the region later named Tsang- 
wu. Cf. Kill tchenq Tchou shu, Wang Hwei : T.P. D24, 7 v. — It was 
known'in Ts'u in the 4tli century as shown by the Li sao. — Tchao t'o, 
of Nan vueh, sent a thousand of these birds to Han Weh-ti, 179 
B.C. Cf" T.P.r.L., 031, 7 .1 
«62) Kien Shu ling t'o tchl ku, 25 '5-4i82-12020-13r>4-tl-c]. 207 Bas.— 
The Kien drum was tlie standard drum in metal of the ,'jliang dynasty 
of wliich the Ts'ix state had adopted the rites wh^n it lepndiated 
those of the Tchou. Tlie Shu drum means the Wooden drum as made 
with trees from Yu-tchang, i.e. Xiang-si. The Ling drum sexangular 
was used specially for the Earth sacrifice. Cf. Ta Tchoti tcheng i/oh : 
T.PA'.L. 5-S-i, 6and 338, ?>. — Skins of Aguanas were used especially 
for drams. The t'o of the Ancient Chinese was probably an alligator, 
whose species has now almost disappeared. Cf. Dr. A. A. Fauvel's 
interesting article on Alligators in China : Journ. China Br. R.A.S., 
1^79, xiii.— Two specimens of the Alligator Sinensis have at last b'^en 
discovered and sent to the Zoological Gardens of London in September 
of 1890. 
^63) Cf. supra § 109. One of these rings had been sent to Ts'in in 

324 B.C. 
S64) Cf. also supra § lOi). 
8 5) Such horses are said by the Klh tr/iung Lchon shu to have been 

presented to Tchou Tcheng Wang Tsiun Hanq liuh ti, 12525-8803- 

12490-125 U Bas. 
■866) The text of my copy of the She Ki, 87, 4 rers. has tchou-tsing, cl. 
137- cl. 174, boat-green which is certainly a misprint for tan-tsing, 34- 
cl. 174 Bas., red-green, which has become a curreuti term for painting 
in f^eneral. 
■867) Manufactured in eastern China. 
•868) The statement in the She Ki, 87, 4 and 4 vers, is interpersed with 

remarks which had nothing to do wi^h the description of the articles. 
869) Oil the previous periods of the writing, cf. supra § lOO. 
■870) Cf. She Ki, Ts'in She Hwang pen ki, 12, 15.— Hu Shen, Shwoh 
v^en, intr. fol. 3. — Tsienllan shu, kiv. xxx. — Under the reign of Han 
Tchang-ti, a.d. 76-38, it was decided to make a dictionary of the 
Tchuen characters. The task was performed in a.d, 89-09 by Hii shen, 
and ihe result of his efforts is the famous Shwoh-wen dictionary, the 
standard work of its kind. He t;ollected9353 characters which in their 
most s )l)er and simple forms respectel the old rales of Sze-tchou (.<;)'-;>?•«, 
^ 100 and his introdactitn fol. 7), au'l he qaoted occasionally some 
441 characters of olden times which had been simplified afterwards. It 
is therefore a mistake to suppose that the characters of the Shwoh 
wen represent the oldest Cldnese characters as some Sinologists have 
done, such as done by Mr. L. C. Hopkins, Ancient tnriting in Baby- 
lonia and in China : Academy, ]\Iay 18, 1889. Cf. my rejoinder on 
The oldest Chinese characters : ibid. June 15, 1889. 
S71) Its invention is attributed to a certain Tcheng Mao. — Cf, same 

autlioritios as in preceeding note. Also Tai ping yil Ian, 740, 3-4. 
■87-*) Iskander was the form of the name among the Persians through 
whom it was spread eastwards. Cf. for instance my paper Sur deux 



CHINESE CIVILISATIOV. 209 

eres z'nconnues de IJ Asie A7)terieure, 330 et 251 ar, J. C, d'apres tin 
document Chmois, Museon, 1891. 

873) Cf. supra note 185. 

871) Cf. Tchuhshu ki men, V, xxxii, 10, and tlio following. 

•875) Cf. Tsien Han Shu, kiv. 91 — She Ki, Meng tion lieh tcluien, kiv. 
88, f. 1 vers. ; Ts'in She Hwang pen ki. Kiv. G,;; fol 19v.-2('.— Ihc 
Ku kin tchu of Tsui-Pao, c. 350 b.c. tells us tliat the great defensive 

- works of the Ts'iuites were made of earth, chiefly red in colour. Cf, 
T.P.Y.L. 19^, 5r. — Some narts of it were built in stone and earth- 
works under the Han dynasty, cf. Hou Han shu : T.P. 331, 6 vers. — 
It was rebuilt under the Ming dynasty. — Cf. O.F. van Mollendorf, Die 
grosse Mauer von China ; Z. f. D.M.G., 1881, xxv. — L'Abbe Larrieu, 
Rapport sur la grande Muraille de la Chine, on il est prouve que cette 
Muraille telle qu'elle est communement decrite non seulement n'existe 
pas, mais meme n'a jamais existe ; Rev. Extr. Orient, 1885, III., 31:7- 
361. — J.S. Brazier, A^ialysis of brick from the great loall of China, J. 
Ch. Br. R..^.S., IS?7, xxi^ 25-'.— H.N.'Stove, The Great Wall of China; 
lllustr. Naval and Milit. Magaz. 1887, p. 227.— E. T C. Werner, The 
Great ivall of China: Arcliteolog., 1589, I, 45, ISO, p. 379-389. — 
E. Martin. La ve'rite' sur la Grande Muraille : L' Anthropolugie, 
1891, II, 438-4li. 

870) Xeither Marco-Polo nor Odoric de Pordenone speak of the Great 
wall, but Radshideddin and Albufedado so. — Alexander the Great was 
reputed to have erected ramparts of this sort (cf. Procop., J3ell. Pers., 
i, 10) in the Caspia n g ates, the Gate of Gates, near Uerhend, where 
inscriptions in cufic of A.n. 465, Pahlevi and Cuneiform have been 
found. (Cf. E. Schuyler, in H. Yule, Marco Polo, II, 537 ; also 
i, 55, 2S3-255. — Eichwald, Periplns des Kasp. M., i, 128. — Ker Por- 
ter, Travels, ii, 520. — F. Lenormant, Orlgines de V Histoire, ii, -k'lb.) 
— The cuneiform inscriptions would be Vannic of the viiith cent, as 
those found in Georgia. Cf. A. H. Sayce, The Cuneiform Inscrip- 
tions of Van, J.R.A.S., 1888, xx, 1. — Another Sadd-i-Iskandar or 
Rempart of Alexander at the S,E. Angle of the Caspian, has been de- 
scribed by Arm. Vambery, Travels in C. Asia, 51 sq. 

877) Cf. She Ki, vi, 2 1-2rt'. -I follow the translation of Dr. J. Legge, 
Chin. Class., 1, 8-9, except in the following cases. I translate "dis- 
courses of the various schools " peh kia yi/., hundred families phrases 
or speeches, instead of his " the books of the Hundred schools." 
Further on " cast away on the market place " instead of his " be put 
to death and their bodies exposed on the market plac-J " ; the Chinese 
words are Kl-she, 4291-2106 Bas. which I have rendered word for word. 
G. Pauthier, who in his Premier Memoire sur V anti quite de V histoire 
et de la civilisation Chinoises, J. A. Sept. Oct. 1867, has given a 
translation (rather inaccurate) of the same document, has rightly re- 
marked that the punishment of the Ki she is described in the Li ki, 
Wang tchi. kiv. 3 (sect, li, 11), and did not imply death. Cf. Sacred 
Books of the East, xxvii, 215. The culprit lost any i)ost or situation 
he occupied, nobody could come to his rescue and he was compelled 
to live to go away from the country. Cf, also T.P.Y.L., 646, Qv. 

878) We have evidence that the edict was strictly put in force by the 
following circumstance. The year after, i.e. in 212, literati of the 
Capital Ilien-yang (mod. Si ngan) having continued to vilify the acts 




210 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

of his government as contrary to the teachings of Confucius, '160 of 
them were buried alive. {Kavg, 11752 Bas.). Cf. She Ki, vi, 24. — 
Cf. on this supplice, note 6G3 supra. 

879) In 26 b.c. by Imperial order a catalogue was prejtared of all the 
books saved from olden times and others, and when finished reached 
a total of over 130O0. — G. Pauthier, ir his pre-cited Afemoii-e has 
given an analysis of this catalogue, full of interest notwithstanding the 
numerous mistranslations, from Pan Ku, Tsieii Han shu, kiv. 30. Cf. 
supi-a, note 621. The books were only those of the Imperial library. 

8?0) Cf. below note 888. 

881) On tlie five bibliotecal catastrophes, cf. A. Wylie, Notes on Chiness 
literature, p. iii-vii. 

882) Cf. J. Darmestater, Le Zend Avesta, 1893, III, viii and xxviii. — ■ 
Also C. de Harlez, Introduction C V Etude de V Avesta, xvi and 
xxxiii. — And supra note 186, 

883) Supra §§ 220 and 173. 

884) It was an expedition made on the proposal and under the command 
of Siii-fuh of Ts'i, with a large number of young men and girls, re- 
ported in the aSV;^ A7. vi, 16 v. and whioh was wrecked, according to 
the Kwa tl tchi of the third cent, on the Tan tcJiou or Quelpaert Is- 
land. The result may have been an unwilling colonisation, and some 
of the ships may have been carried on the southern coast of some 
Japanese island. Prof. L. de Rosny tells us that there is a temple 
in tlio honour of Siii-fuh at Kuuiano, province of Ki-i, Japan. Cf. 
La civilisation Ja^ponaise, 1883, p. 93-1. 

885) The notion of such an elixir had come from the fabled reports about 
the Soma, as we have ?>\wys\\ supra § 132 and note loS. 

886) Siu-fuh, saved from the wreck of his expedition, had reported 
himself to the Emperor, and given some wonderful excuses for his fail- 
ure, in that same yea.i. 

887) Kiang-tch'eng, the modern Sliang-yuen, in Kiang-ning fu, Kiangsu 
— The She Ki, 28, 12 tells us that he went himself on the sea. 

888) Herewith a short list of these states :— i. 2's'h, 209-205 b.c— ii. 
Si Tsu, 206-202 b.c. — iii. Ilong-shan or Tchang-Shao, 206-157 B.C. — 
iv. Li7t Kiang, 206-20-i b.c— v. Kiu-Ktang, 206-204 b.c — vi. Tchao 
or Tni, 209-204 b.c— vii. Tchang-Shan, 206 b.c— viii. :^V/, 209- 
206 B.C.— ix. Lm-tchi, 206-204 b.c— x. Tsi peh, 20 G b.c— xi. Fg?;, 
209-201 B.C.— xii. Llao tung, 206 B.c— xiii. Wei, 209-206 b.c— 

xiv. ,S/ Wei, 206-203 b.c— xv. Yn, 206-204 b.c xvi. Han, 208- 

205 B.C.— xvii. Ho-nan, 20?-207 b.c. — xviii. Han 206 b.c 



Sect, B. Introduction of Buddhistn. 
227. The religion of the Light of Asia was introduced no less than 
three times in China, twice in an indistinct and unsuccessful manner, and 
a third time under Imperial protection with permanent success. In the 
two first instances the BuddhistShamans came on the trail of Brah- 
manist ascets, and it is difficult to know from the Chinese side when 
they began exactly. In the North-east after centuries of Indian influ- 



CHirESE CIVILISATION. 20? 

ence through the Sea trade, we have lionrd of Si la, arrived fmni Magadha 
after a journey of five years in 305 n.c.^*^ He is not called a Shaman 
and although an amplified tradition makes him exhibit Biiddliist images, 
it is not at all probable that lie belonged to the persuasion of Sakyamuni 
unless the early Buddhism should have differed from what it became subse- 
quently. After him flourished also in the Y(7i country, Sung-wu-ki 
Tcheng-peh-k'iao, Tchung-shang^^'' and later on the Shaman T z e-k a o 
who was a contemporary of Ts'in She Hwang-ti. All these men had 
thus settled in the native land of Taoszeism. And Szema Tsien the 
historian himself imbued with Taoist views does not separate them from 
the school of Tsou-hien. He tells us that ''they were skilled in the Path 
of the Richis, divested themselves of their bodily frames, were dissolved 
and transformed, and relied on the worshi[) of saints and genii."' These 
ideas which did not belong to Tsou-yen and lofik like a garbled view of 
the mental condition of the Buddhist shamans, thus transformed into a 
physical notion, were most probably proper only to Tze-Kao and his dis- 
ciples. He is 'the first Buddhist bonze known with some probability, and 
he was seen by She Hwang-ti, at Pah hai (gulf of Petchili, near Lai 
tchouj in 219 b.c.^^^ He seems afterwards to have gone and settled in 
the Tchao hill !, in the North of Honan.s92 Some years later, in ^l;"), 
the same Emperor being at Kieh-sliih^ ^3 ^ ;p Liao -si; near the present 
Tcheng-teli, N. Tchihli) sent a certain Lu-sheng of Yen to fetch another 
Shaman, named K a o-s h e.^^^ Nothing more i? known of tliese two n^r 
of any other Shamans there afterwards. In 112 b.c. the sootlisayer^^^ 
Luan-ta persuaded Han Wu-ti that he had travelled by sea, and seen the 
residences of Ngan-ki sheng, a former magician, and of the Shamans. ^^ 
His boasting shows in any case, if nothing more that Shamans had 
ceased at that time to inhabit any part of the Chinese dominion, and 
that their former presence in 219-215 u.C, in the east and in the west, 
as we shall see directly, had been decidedly an unsuccessful attempt. 

228. A remarkable incident occurrfd in 221 b.c. on the Western bor- 
ders, in the town of Lin-tao (S.W. Kansuh, near the Tibetan frontier). ^^'' 
Twelve men of very high stature, dressed like Teks (barbarian Turks) ar- 
rived there. The event was looked upon as so important that the Em- 
peror had their statues cast in bronze, of an enormous size, weighing some 
1500 kilos each,'*®^ These were broken and sent to the foundry to cast 
coins in 189 a.d. by order of Tung Tchoh, the destroyer of Loh-yang.299 
No accurate description of these statues seems to have been preserved 
and we do not know what they exactly represented. It has been sug- 



t 



208 ^ OUrulK OF THE EAULY 

gested that they may have been buddhist, but there is no evidence that 
they were so, and the Buddhists have never clearly claimed them for 
their own.^^'' 

229. On the other hand the following story which undoubtedly concerns 
them shows that they were Hindus or at least that they were professing 
Hindu views. " She Hwang-ti was very fond of all that concerned 
spirits and genii, and he sought for marvels all over the empire. Now 
at that time there were some people of Yuan-kiu^'^^ (in N.W. Szetchuenj^ 
who floating upwards the Black River (a N.W. affluent of the 3Iin 
River) on li boats (or coracles), ^^^ thus reached the i ung region or pu 
(i.e. the S.W. of Kansuh where was Lin-tao). She Hwang-ti had a long 
conversation with them about the beginning and transformations of the 
Universe ; they told him that the sun and moon were at certain times 
sunk in the water 90000 lis deep, and that there were then a day and a 
night of 10000 years each. They gave him some peculiar stone which 
during that time was used as a substitute to give light, and which being 
pierced or broken produced fire as large as grains of rice and illumined.ao^ 
This was the first introduction of the pyrites in China, therfore older than 
we supposed.^*^* 

It is clear that these Brahmanists or Hindus coming from the N.W. 
of Szetchucn, belong to the same people that had settled as anchorets 
and made caves in the cliffs of the Min and other rivers in the sixth cen- 
tury and afterwards. ^05 

230. The same wave of penetration of Brahmanic views must be looked 
upon as the cause of the influences evidently Hinduic which had been at 
work among the Hiungnus on the Northern borders of China 200 b.o. 
According to the Annals of the First Han dynasty their horses were ar- 
ranged according to symbolical colours of tlie points of space, pure white 
on the west, white-faced greys on the east, black on the north, and bays 
on the south : a Hindu arrangement as far as could be.^*^^ 

In 121 B.C., the golden statue of a god worshipped by the Hiung-nus, 
was taken from the hiu-tu,9^'^\x. ordo or residence of one of their princes, 
in the northern vicinity of Liang-tchou, (Kansuh) by the young Chinese 
general Ho-Kiu-ping, and brought back at Yun-yang a district of Tchang- 
ngan.^"^^ It was apparently not a statute made according to the canons 
of the Buddhists who have refused to acknowledge it, although the pro- 
babilities are in favour of its Buddhist cliaracter.^^9 

231. On the other hand, a distinct mission of Buddhists is claimed by 
them to have t?ken place in 217 e.g., when a Shaman Li-fang '•^^'^ and 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 209 * 

seventeen companions is reputed to have come from India toLoh3'ang. The 
storv has come to us through two sources, 9^\ both Buddhist and some- 
wliat amplified with marvellous details, but all the probabilities indicate 
that a genuine historical fact underlies the account in question. As v?as 
the case with the Shamans of Sliantung and Tchihli, they disappeared 
altogether during the temporary collapse of the political edifice built up by 
the Siie Hwang and the disorders which preceded the rise of the Han 
dvnastv. 

23-. It is rather remarkable that for three centuries after the unsuc- 
cessful attempts we have just noticed, nothing should be known of the 
Buddhist infiltrations, which considering the activity of Buddhist pro- 
paganda everywhere else, must have reached China, one way or another.-'^^ 
Influences of foreign origin were possible at a time of separate states, 
without much of them be known to the outside ; but in a centralised 
Empire, as was that of the Han dynasty according to tbe written his- 
tory, any fresh influence or activity of importance, such as a Buddhist 
movement, ci>nld occur unknown only in tlfe non-Chinese parts of China. 
These were the west of Szetchnen until 110 B.C., the I'een state of Yun- 
nan until 109 B.C., the Tung-hm and Min-yueh states of Fukien until 
111 B.C.. a; d ihf' Nan-iiueh state of oouth Hnnan, Kwang-tung, Kwang- 
si and Tungking, until 111 b.c, which were all subdued either as 
protectorates or as Chinese provinces, and more or less temporarily in 
some cases. But as far as I am aware there is no available information 
as yet on the matter. 

233. At the beginning of the reign of Han Ming-ti. a.d. 58, tidings of 
Buddhism had reached the Imperial court, and one of the brothers of the 
Emperor, Prince of Tsu, was deeply interested with its doctrine in view 
of comparing them with those of the Hwang-Lao or Taoszeist school.^ ^^ 
In A.t). 63, Ming Ti made his famous dream of a flying golden figure, 
which the historiographer Fu-yh already acquainted with Buddhism, ex- 
plained as connected with the Buddha. The outcome of the movement 
was the expedition of an Imperial commission to India at the end of 
A.D. 64^ ^■^ to get proper information. It came back in the year 67 with 
two shamans named Ka-slap Ma-tang, i.e. Kasiapa Matanga and Gaj)- 
lan, i.e. Gobharana^^^ who settled at Loh-yang, in the Lan-tat or Orchid 
gallery, where the Sutra in 42 sections was then for the first time com- 
pleted, ^^^ The Peh Ufa Se or White horse monastery, west of the 
Capital, was built for them, and finished in a.d. 71, and they died there 
not long aftei wards. 



210*' OllIGIN OF THE EARLY 

Notes 

889) Cf. supra § 196. 

890) Cf. supra § 173 on the school of Tsou-hien. 

891} Cf. Szoma Tsien. She Ki, kiv, 2 >, fol. Id, 11. -Herbert J. Allen, 
Shnilaritfi hetiveen Buddhism and earhj Taoism, China Review, 1€87, 
XV, p. 96-99. — T. de L., How in 219 n.c, Baddh'sra entered China : 
B.&O.R., May 1891, p. 97-99; The Introduction of B%ddhism iii^o 
China : Acad. Oct. 3. 1891. — H. J. Allen, same subject, Acad. Sei)t. 
12, and Nov, li, 1891. The hypercriticism of the latter note, gops 
beyond the mark, 

892) The last book of the Shan hal king, which book as we know was 
compiled by Liu-hin about our era from older documents, tells us 
that, " East of the Hwa mount and of the Tsing river, on the Tcliao 
hills, lived men called Peh and Tze Kai)", whom the gloss says were 

Recluses. 

893) It was there that the king of Yen had built a palace for Tson- 
hien about 310 B.C. cf. SM/>ra par. 178. 

S94) Of. She Ki. vi, l^r. 

895) On Lnan-ta and other magicians, cf. below par. 237. 

896) Cf. She-Ki, kiv. xii, 6 v. ; xxviii, 28 v. 

897) The town had been founded in 239 b.c. and populated with the 
removed inhabitants of Tun-liu (in Sliansi) by Tcheag Ts'in Wang, 
the future She Hwang-ti. Cf. Szema Tsien, She Ki, kiv. vi, fol. 3, 
And for the history of the latter town, cf. my Catalogue of Chinese 
Coins, Earifi period, p. Ixiv. 

898) Cf. SheKi, kiv, 6, fol. 1 —Tsien Han shu, Wu heng tchi.— She 
Hwang-ti h ving pacified the Empire, had collected at the capital, 
Hien-yang, all the weapons and implements of war, which were then 
made chiefly of bronze. The weight of each statue was of one thous- 
and shih (She Ki), and therefore according to the weights list in my 
book on Chinese coins, about 1500 kilos. — In the Han annals, I.e. these 
foreigners are said to have been 5 tcliang (i.e. 50 feet) in height, with 

feet six idiih or S})ans long, — Cf. also T. de L., The Introduction of 
Buddhism into China : Tiie Academy, 3 Oct. 91. — Four large bells 
with tlieir stands were cast at the same time with the same 
material. 
399) San fi. hwavg tu, kiv. i, fol. 4 vers. : kiv. v, fol. 4 vers. 

900) Cf. Herbert J. Allen in The Academy, and my rejoinder, 3 Oct. 
91, — I had not yet found the story quoted in the text when I wrote 
this rejoinder. — The Tsin shu or Annals of the TsiN dynasty (265- 
419 A.D.J tells us that in a palace of Peng tcheng (the present Siu- 
tchou of Kiang-su) was preserved drawings of Buddhist statues, made 
by the hand of a former Emperor, after the model of Lin-tao, which 
the Tek barbarians had made, but which was found not to be accord- 
ing to the Buddhist principles. Cf. T.P. 657, I'r. 

901) Yuav-liii, 2118-5078 Bas.- Also called ^/m-H?/. 

902) /./, 9618 Bas., litt. '-calabash." On tlie Coracles of West China, 
cf. No;e 69 and add. 

903) Cf. Wang tze nien, Shihy Ki : T.P.Y.L., 869, 1-2 for the full story, 
901) Cf. SHjira § 1 -56 and note 689. — Tlie legend concludes by a most 

curious statement. It tells us that in the days of Shennung (Sargon) 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 211 

tlie Arabs (Ta-shik) had [)resentO(l similar stones to him. 

905) Cf. supra, par. 215 and note 838. 

906) White liorses in the absence of yellow were s'lbstitnted for the west- 
ern colour, white-faced greys fur white oast, black for black north, bavs 
for red south.- C. Pan Ku, Tsien Han shn, Kiv. 'J I ; tr. A. Wylie, 
J. A. I., 1873, p. 41-.— II. de Charencey, De la Symholujue fles points 
de Vespace cliez les /findns : Revue de Philolo^ie, 1874, I.. 174. 

907) A gloss savs that hia-tu in the Hiung-nu language means town. 
90S) Cf. Han tchi.— Ti kiao ki tchi. 

909) A commentator has suggested that it was perhaps K'ai lo sJwn, the 
God of the Roads, which was probably worshipped by this people, but 
the suggestion is entirely gratuitous and contrary to probabilities. 

910) Sometimes called 7's'i-// /(«,<7, which could represent .S/-i?;rt?/a. 

911) Cf. Po sie km by Fn-lin, 624-G40 K.D.—Fah ivan tchu lin, by Hiueii- 
yun, 6G8 a.d. — Kin ting ku kin t'u shn tt^ih tch'eng. sect. l8, kiv. Shi 
kia. Kwang poll wuhtchi, kiv. 16. — R. K. Douglas, China, 18S7. p. 
344. — S. Beal, Four lectures on Buddhist litevxture in China, p. 2 ; 
buddhism in China, p. 48. 

912) Tlie Wei lioh of Yu-hwan (300 A.d.) in its article on L d ni-n i 
(mod. Lin-er, 8G60-588 Bos.), i.e. the Lumbini, birth place (.f tlie 
Buddha, quotes an extract from a Fou-fu ki//g, relating the l)irth of 
the great Sage, and the following circumstance. "In Middle India, 
moreover, there existed a saintly man r.amed Sa lu (mod. Sha-lit/, 
4888-2687 Bas. ; i.e. a Sdla, writ. Sha-lo, 4S85-8176 Bas. ; a title 
given to every Buddha ; cf. Eitel, Skr. Chin. Diet, s.v.) Formerly 
in A.D. 2, a disciple of that Master, King-lu, on the advice of [tsung, 
2700 Bas.) the Yueh-ti King, sent Y-tsun-kou with a Fou-t\i king, 
or Buddhist Book (to China). Its contents agreed with that of Lao- 
tze of the Middle Kingdom ; it went away and came back, for the rea- 
son that Lao-tze went awny from the Gate (the Han kuh kwan') to the 
Tsen-tuh (mod. Tien tchu) of the Si-yii (W. x\sia) to teach the Hu 
(bearded barbarians) and become Fou-t'u (the Buddha). Cf. Tai ping 
yiX Ian, kiv. 797, Gr. A similar text, witli additions and suppressions, 
has often beej quoted in various later works and compilations. I am 
unable to follow either G. Pauthier, Examen method iqiie des faits qui 
concernent le Thien-tehu, 1^39, p. 14-15, or Mr. E.J. Specht, Etudes 
sur VAsie Centrale, I., 1890, p. 34-40, in their disagreeing rendering? 
of the text. Its imp-.rtance lies in two points, viz., that the Yveh-t 
were rulers in India in 2 a.d. and that Buddhist teachings were then 
sent to China. King-lu is said to have been originally from Ts'in. 

913) For this paragraph cf. Hou Ha ji Kt hy Yuen Hung of a.d. 400. 
in T.P.Y.L., Kiv, G54, fol. 1. — Kao seng tchuen : ibid. 655, 2. — Sam. 
Beal, Buddhist Literature in China, p. 3. 

914) Or the beginning of the following year. Hence the frequent mis- 
taken date of 65 for the Introduction of liuddhism in China instead 
of A.D. 67. 

i>15) Modern Kia yeh mo t'ung. In the Archaic dialecte geh, 9001 Bas., 
leaf, m.ikesj iep, such as in Sino-Annamese. — The full Chinese name 
of the second bonze which is read at present u'chu Fah Ian has been 
variously rendered by European scholars, Dharmaraksha, Dharmiinando, 
and by the Tibetans, rightly I think Gohharaiia. The first Tchu is the 
usual determinative prefi.x of all the names of Buddhist monks of In- 



212 CHINRSE CIVILISATION. 

dian origin. (Cf. T. de L., The Yueh'ti and the early Buddhist miss- 
ionaries in China : Acad. Dec. 31, 87). The second character Fah, 
Fap, 4917 Bas , L a w. is made of the cl. water and the phonetic K'u, 
Kop,\i2, Call, away, whence its use by the Buddhist transcribers 
for the sound ku, ko, kap, as in the syllabary of Sangharama (cf. St. 
Julien, Methode pour dechiffrer les noms Sanskrits -Chinois, n. ^74), 
orin the name of Kashgar by Hiuen Tsangand others. (Cf. J. Eitel, 
Sa nskrlt- Chinese Diet, s.v.) 
916) The Chmese text says : tchhi, Men, 764-79u2 Bas., first bound or 
sealed up. — Therefore it was not in the White horse Monastery (which 
was not yet built) that this famous Sutra was completed, as misstated 
in Bunyu Nanjio. Catalogue of th" Tripitaka, p. 376. 



Chap. VII.— Sixth Period : 221 B.C.— a.d. 220. 

Sect. C. Private trade and Official opening of inland intercourse tvitJi 
the West. 

• 

234. Since the reign of Duke Hwei of Ts'iN (399-386 b.c.) the Ts'in- 
ites used to go as far west as the present Kwa-tchou of Kansuh W.^^'' 
But they did not otherwise entertain or favour any foreign relations,^ ^'^ 
and the foundation of the Empire by their Princes did not attract traders 
through the Kansuh N.W. Route. Commercial intercourse in tlie sec- 
ond century B.C. was carried through the route of Lintao, (at present 
Min tchou), also Wu-tu and Han tchung. Beyond Lin-tao'-''^ to the west, 
thp route followed is not known, but in a fragment added to the Shan 
Hat King under the Han dynasty from older documents, two names of 
localities seem to refer to stations of that trade. It says that in the 
west, m the Region of the Flowing Sands, there is a country called Mar- 
ket of the valley, Hoh she-'^^ ; and further in the west beyond the sands 
another country called Se-yep^^^. The latter would remind us ol So-yep, 
which in later writers is described as a place where the merchants used 
to congregate, should it not be so far in the west.^^2 

235. Among the natural products imported into China by this inland 
trade, were brimstone from Tsiu-mi,^'^^B,n^ Nephrite Jade from Khotan.^^i 
In 133 B.C. we hear of the arrival of merchants from, i.e. through Yen- 
ki ( ? Karashar) with a large mirror of black metal, measuring four 
spans ;^25 rubbing it with felt and powder of black tin kept it shiny .^^6 
It was the beginning of Greek notions and arts in China. 



214 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

236. Since the conquests of Alexander, the influence of Greek civili- 
sation was paramount in the West of Asia. The Seleucidian dominion 
had been broken up in the East by the rising of two separate kingdoms, 
in the middle of the third century .9^7 Diodotus had founded the Greco- 
Bactrian, and Arsaces the Parthian, ^^^ on the west and north of the 
other. The Arsacidse were so far grecised that their coins bore Greek 
legends, ^^^ and we know from Chinese history that they were the self-made 
intermediaries between the west and the Chinese by the inland nort" 
route.^^o We have seen that some tidings of the feats of Alexander the 
Great had reached the Flowery Land in the 3rd cent.93i The Chinese 
were indebted to the Greeks for many things in the following century, 
such as industrial processes,^^^ modes of issuing coins,^33 astronomical 
theories, ^3* and notions of Alchemy. 

237. Among the many novelties which appeared in China during the 
first period of the reign of Han Wu-ti, the most striking was certainly 
the last named, i.e. Alchemy. And if we consider that cinnabar^ '^ and 
orpiment^36 .^ygi-g ^j^g principal ingredients used for the wanted transmuta- 
tion into gold, as they were in the west long before, since the days of 
the Persian Ostanes and his pupil Democrites,^^'' it is difficult not to 
believe that these new views were a foreign importation and had come 
from the countries where they were known. The first Alchemist in 
Chinese history was a certain Li-tchao kiun, (145-132 B.C.) a familiar 
of the Marquess of Shen-tse (in Tchihli) under the reign of King-ti 
(156-141 B.C.), who had come no-body knew from where. He was 70 
years of age, when his views about transmutation and a worship of the 
furnace^^s were adopted by the credulous Han Wu-ti in 132 b.c.^^* 
Tbese new notions joined to the older ones concerning the drug of im- 
mortality and the transformation of the five elements, produced a most 
unhappy movement which lasted for centuries, and, in China (as in the 
West), had a destructive influence on the mind of several Emperors and 
an injurious effect on the common sense of many. In the 9th century 
it cost the life of four emperors, who died poisoned by an alleged Elixir 
of immortality. ^^'^ 

238. The earhest introducers of alchemy arrived by the west route, vi^ 
Lin-tao or Wu-tu, and repaired to the east region where only they could find 
congenial surroundings. It was a repetition of what had occurred with the 
early Ruddhists (§227). After the death of Li-tchao kiun, a certainKwau- 
shu, a man of Shantung East was appointed his successor.'*^ After him ap- 
peared Shao-ong 11^ B.C. who came from Ts'i, i.e. the West of Shantung. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 215 

In V 3 B.C. came to conrt Lwan-ta from Kiaotung(E. of the Gulf of Kiao- 
tchou, Shantung East) who was a pupil of the same master as Shao-ong. 
And in the same year appeared also at court Kung-sun-klng, of Ts'i 
who professed the same views. ^*^ Alchemy had therefore found in the 
cradle-land of Tao-szeism^'*^ favourable circumstances where it was 
eagerly accepted, and this explains the alliance which took place be- 
tween it and the brahmanical ideas current there, as well as the hold it 
soon assumed among the Tao-szeists. 



N 



Notes 

917) Till ping yii Ian, kiv. 65, f. G. 

918) Par. 148 supr., we have remarked that several barbarous innova- 
tions in Ts'iN, 7th cent. b.c. should have been due to Tartar influence, 
and in the note 854 we have been able to record that Duke Muh of 
Ts'iN, had a Western Jung as principal adviser previous to 626 b.c — 
Cf. also Tsien Han Shu, kiv. 94 ; History of the Heimgnoo, trad. 
Wyhe ; J.A.I., Dec. 1873, p. 404. 

919) In Lin-tao, the second word is the name of a river, not the word 
for ' route.'— Cf. supr § 22S and note 897 for the arrival of foreigners, 
most probably thruugh the Sung-pan ting route from the South. In 
18^4-5, Potanine the Russian traveller has explored these routes, which 
are entered from his report in map 13 of Dutreuil de Rhins, Asie 
Gentrale, 1S89. From Min tchou, southwards, an available route 
passes through Si-ku, and Nan-ping, to Sung-pan ting. From Min- 
tcbou, North-westwards, a route passes through Djoni and Labran to 
Si-ning. 

920) Hoh she, 1740-2406 'S>?i%.—Shan Hal King, 18, 1. 

921) Se.yep, 4354-9051 Bas., or Fan-yep, 4837-9051 Bas. ; the two 
characters Se and Fan being nearly similar. 

922) So yeh, So-yep, 77S6-9051 Bas. ; also Sui-yeh, 6886-9051 Bas.— 
Cf. Hiuen-Thsang, tr. Beal, i, 26. It was situated between the Hi 
river and Taraz. Cf. E. Bretschneider, Notices on the Mediaeval Geo- 
graphy, p. 36-7. 

923) Brimstone, shih liu hioang, stone-fllowing-yellow, which as learned 
afterwards by the Chinese was brought from certain hills, 800 li dist- 
ant from Kili-sze (Kao tchang, Karakhodjo), called Tsiu-mi. (Ct. 
Poh wuh tchi : T.P., 987, 3, and Feh she : T.P. 796, 4-5). The exact 
date of its first introduction is not ascertained, but it is spoken of in 
the work bearing the name of Pien-Tsiao, the celebrated physician 
of the 6th eent. b.c. ; it is spoken of anyhow in literature, 200 B.C. 
— It arrived through Han-tchung, which fact indicates the route through 
North Tibet. (cf.Fan-tze, Ki-jan : T.P. 987, 4).— In the south of the 
Tueh-Pan country, north-west of the Wu-suns, there was a Fire Moun- 
tain, Hwo shan, from which flowed sulphur in large quantifies. This 
country is spoken of in the Dynastic Annals of the Northern Wej, 
and in those of the Sui, which fact suggests that it was not known 
before the fifth century (Cf. T.P. 795. 2; 796, 4, and 987, 3). Now this . 
was the Nortl^ern country where the W. Hiung:;nus had fled after their ~^ 
defeat by the Chinese General Tou-hien In a.d. 8^. It extended far 

in the West, and answers to Saimatia. In the fifth century the Huus 



216 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

had conquered tlie European Sannatia (De Gnigncs, Hist, des Huns., 
ii., 301). According to Strahlenberg, Description, p. 448, the only- 
place where sulphur is found is in the k'ngdom of Casan (Kazan), 
and this answers to the foregoing indications. Curiously enough the 
modern Chinese Yueh-pan, restored by the archaic dialects, makes Sol- 
pan, Sol-jw, therefore equal to Sor-ma, a sufficiently approximate ren- 
dering of Sarmatia. The fact is interesting in several respects, but it 
is not necessary that this first Sulphur should have come from Kasan. 
There are nearer places. Sulphur was at one time collected on the 
Pehshan North o'f Kucha (cf. Mushketoflf, Turkestan, 1886, i., 172 : 
E. Bretscsneider, Mediccv. Res. ii., 244). The summit of Mount Dem- 
avend, near the Caspian, is a mass of sulphur. Allusion is made to 
sulphur trade in the Slum Hai King, xi., 2 and xviii., 3. — Sulphur 
from Tu-kun, i.e. Tagaung in Burma, was imnorted into China in our 
3rd cent. Cf. Wu shi Wai twoh tchuen : T.P.'7?8, 6 and 982, 2. On 
the sulphur of Tagaung, cf. Balfour, Cyclop. Ind., iii., 759, 

924) Cf. supra § 22^1. 

925) It was placed in the Wang shen Kok or gallery. — Cf. De Mailla, 
Histoire ge'ne'rale, iii., 25. — Tung ming Id, T.P.Y.L., 717, 5. — The 
Greeks used to make very large metallic mirrors. Cf. Beckmann, Hist- 
ory of Im^entions, 1846, ii., 65, and the following note. 

J 926) Hwai-nan-tze (d. 122 k.c.) tells us that the polished metallic mirrors 
were at first somewhat dim, and one could not see one's features in 
them ; but on rubbing the mirror with some white felt and yuen-tin (?) 

^ well ground, even curly hair and whiskers would be easily seen in it. — 
Cf. T.P.Y.L., in, 2v., and 812, ^.—Yuen-sih, may be good tin, 
or black tin, because of the tabued hiuen, black in the T.P.Y.L. 
edition of 1807 to which I refer ; but black tin, liiuen sih in Chin- 
ese is unknown to me. The thing referred to may have been an amal- 
gam of Mercury, which as we know was indeed used by them. Cf. on 
on this point, Stan. Julien— P. Champion, Industries anciennes et mod- 
ernes de la Chine, p. 63-65, — It is curious that we should find the 
process, obviously current in the Greek world, described in the classical 
writers, not with reference to metallic mirrors, but for mirrors of glass 
or another material. Cf. Beckmann, Bist. Invent., ii., 66 ; Marquis de 
Joutfroy, Dia.des Invent., 1860, ii., 455 , Victor Fournel, Le Vifux 
neuf, ii., 148 ; iii., 557 ; S. Eeinach, Philol. Class., i., 96 ; ii., 149, 276 
Tiie process seems to have been known in India. Cf. Archives des 
de'couvertes, xv., 365 ; V. Fournel, Vieux Neuf, ii., 267. 
027) A clear sketch of this complicated period is given by M. Ed. Drouin. 
in his Notice sur la Bactriane (Extr. de la Grande Encyclopedic), 1887. 
— Cf. also Percy Gardner, The Coins of the Greek and Scythic Kings 
of Bactria ar.d India, 1886, introd, 

928) Cf .T. de L., VEre des Arsitcides en 248 Av . J.C., Louvain, 1891. 

929) Cf. Percy Gardner, The Parthian Coinage, 1878, (Intern. Numism. 
Orient., I., v). 

980 IIou Han Shu, kiv. 88, Ta Ts'in.— TfW lioh ; San Kivoh tchi. kiv. 
30); par. 2 4, 45.— F. Hirth, Chijm and the Poman Orient, p. 42, 70, 72. 

931) Snpr. par. 225. 

932) For instance the jjolishing of metallic mirrors (note 926) : and 
burning lenses in Hwai-min tze. Cf. T.P, F.Z., 869, 3-4. and for 
tlie same expanded : the Pah ivuh tchi ; cf . G. Schlegel, Urcmographie 




Y 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 217 

Chinoise, p. 142. 
223) The Mints of Athens and Rome were imder the superintendence of 
three Mint masters. In 116 b.c, Han Wa-ti reorganized tlie State 
mint on the same system. (I'sien Han Shu, Shih ho tchij; Fr. Lenorm- 
ant, La Monnaie dans VAntiqutte, iii., 50 sq. ; T. de L., Catalogue of 
Chinese Coins, introd. xxix. 

934) For instance the circuhxting movement of the earth in the heavens. 
in Hwai-nan-tze, ap. Cibot and Grosier, Chine, vol. vi. — The theory- 
was taught by Pythagoras, 500 b,c,, and by Aristarchus of Samos. c. 
260 B.C. Cf. Th' H.^Iartin, Etudes sur le Timee, ii., 123 .-The same 
view was entertained by the Egyptians, according to : F. Chabas, Sur 

un texte Egyptien relatif au moiivement de la terre. Zeits. f. -^gypt» 
Spr. 1864, p. 97 ; and J. Lieblein, Les Anciens Egyptiens connaissai- 
ent-ils le mouvementdela terrel (Congr. Prov. Orient., St. Etienne, 1880, 
p. 127. — We have mentioned before in note 801, the notion of a three 
legged bird in the Sun from Asia Minor which appears in the Li sao. 
and is spoken of also by Hwai-nan-tze. Cf. T.P.Y.L., 3, 3 ; 920, 6, 

935) Cf. She H, xxviii, 23. 

936") Or yellow sulphuret of Arsenic. — In the writings of Hwai Nan tze 
d. 1j2 B.C. Cf. T.P.Y.L., 985, 1 v., 3 v. 

937) According to Synesius, Cf. Notices et Extraits des Manuscrits, t. 
vii, p. 2i\3. Also t. vi, p. 306.— Plin. H N. xxxiii, 22 says that Cali- 
gula also, when he tried to make gold, usecl orpiment (like Democrites); 
Victor Fournel, Le Vieux Neaf, III, 500-5U2. 

938) One cannot fail to remark the importance attached to the furnace 
by the alchemists ; a further connection of Chinese alchemy with that 
of the west. 

939) Cf. She ki, kiv. 28, fol. 22 v., 2 3.— On the worship of the furnace, 
cf. supra par. 1S3, note 6 65. — The earliest works on Alchemy in 
China are those of Hwai-nan-tze, d. 122 B.C. ; Tchun tsiu yun tou 
tcJbU, 50 B.C. ; Ts'an timg k'i bv Wei Peh-vang, 150 a.d. ; and that 
of Pao-p'oh-tze, 300 a.d.— Tn 1855, Dr. J. Edkins, On Early Tauist 
alchemy (Shanghae Miscellany), and in Phases in the development of 
Tav.ism (Trans. Ch. Br. R.A.S., Y ) has suggested a Chinese origin 
for the Alchemy of the West. W.A.P. Martin, in his Alchemy in 
China, China Review, 1879, reprinted in his Han Un papers, 1881 
has taken again the same view. But the two scholars have over-looked 
the older antiquity of tlie West. — On the latter's history cf. the special 
works of Marcelin Berthelot, Les Origines de VAlchimte 1885 ; Col' 
lection des Anciens Alchimistes Grecs, 1887-S : La Chimie dans V 
Antiqutte et an Moyen-Age : Rev. 2 Mondes, 15 Sept. 1 Oct. 93 ; 
and also Transmission des Industries Chimiques de V Antiquite au 
Moyen-age, ibid. 1 Sept. 92, p. 39-55. 

940) The researches made for long by sea and even by land to find the 
plant producing the drug of immortality i.e. the tze-mai ov soma (cf. su- 
pra §§ 123,214, 225, notes 458, 462) had proved unsuccessful. The 
current notion was that it was like the ku plant or hydropyrum lati- 
folium (cf. Tung Fang so, Shih tchou ki : T.P.Y.L. 60, 4 r.-E. Bret- 
schneider, Botan. Sinic, ii, 83, 350), So that the Taoszeist alchemists 
endeavoured to compose an Elixir of immortahty. Four Emperors 
of the Tang dynasty, Hien tsung in 820, Muh tsung in 824, Wu 
tsung in 846 and Slicn tsung in 859, died from the Elixirs of im- 



218 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

mortality given to them by the Taoszeists who were then in favour at 
court. (Cf. De Mailla, Hist. Gen. vi, 430, ^ 1:2, 492, 50<). The 
avowed purpose of these alchemists was the transmutation of the body 
into an incorruptible substance by means of the absorption into it of 
special elixirs compounded principally of mercury and mica as in India, 
cf. A. Barth, Religions of India, p. 210. — Researches by sea after the 
fortunate islands and the drug- of immortality, were still jjoing on at 
the time of Sun kwang founder of Wu, one of the Three Kingdoms, 
3rd cent. Cf. Wa tcTii. 
94 Ij In § 173 supra, we have enumerated the names of the principal 
thauraaturgists of Yen and of Ts'i during the lifth period. Sung Wu 
ki was followed during the reign of She Hwang ti by Ngan ki sheng 
and by Siu-fuh (cf. note 884). Under Han Hiao Wen-ti flourished 
about 165 B.C. Kung-sun Tch'en, and Sin-yuen Ping of Ts'i, cf. 
She ki, kiv. 28, fol. 19-19 v. — On Sung-Wu ki, and Ngan-ki sheng, 
cf. Mayers, Chinese R.M., i, 641 and .'J23. In 163 B.C. Sin yuen-ping 
is attributed (De Mailla. Hist. Gen., ii, 563, and Ed. Chavannes, Le 
'Vraite sur les Sacrifices Fong et Chan, p. 44) a high feat which could 
vie with that of Joshua, as he would have effectually commanded the 
sun to retrograde in heaven. I am afraid a misunderstanding has 
crept there from the frequent confusion of the characters hou, prince, 
(217 Bas.) and hou, expect (293 Bas). It is the seccmd charac- 
ter, not the first, which occurs in the text (cf. She Jci, xxviii, 20 v.). 
The statement is the following : Ping, speaking to the Emperor, said: 
'' Your servant expects the sun will be repeated in the centre (of the 
sky) ; and in only a moment, the sun stopped and was again in the 
centre." This is clearly a phenomenon of parhelion, which Sin yuen 
ping had foreseen from its preliminary phases. 

942) Cf. She ki kiv. 28, fol. 22 v., 23 v., 25 v., 30, and 32.— Kiao- 
tung had been created into a small feudal state in 207 b.c. cf. She 

ki, xvi, 10. 

943) This circumstance might suggest that Alchemy was carried to China 
by the sea-traders of Hormuz {supra § 198-2 06) to the South-east 
Coast of China and from there to the Shan-tung peninsula. But in 
110 B.C. those who came from the states of Yueh (§ iiOl) to the Chi- 
nese court where alchemy was so much in favour, speak only of their 
worship of special genii, and of their divination by (alectromancy) 
birds which were immediately adopted. {She ki, xxviii, 40 v., 41). 
Their silence about transmutation is rather significant. The art was 
Greek, and the Greeks were then near the route of the trade to China 
from Western Turkestan. Cf. par. 23 4, 2 36 and 242. 



2 39. Since the last years of the Ts'iN, the Hiung-nus said to be Turk- 
ish stock,'^^* outside the north borders of China, who had long been in 
enmity with the states, had increased in boldness and their frequent raids 
on the Imperial territory where they advanced as far as the south centre 
of Shansi and of Shensi, resulted in a state of incessant warfares. In 
176 B.C. they had pushed forward to the west of their former quarters 



CHrNESE CIVILISATION. 219 

and established their sway over a large area ; the Yii eh-ti^^^ were finally 
crashed, tlie Wit sun, who from the Tien slum range had advanced 
South-east, as far as Ivwa-tclmu of Kan-snh west, had been compelled to 
withdraw, and the state of Lou Ian (for Labran, later Shen-shen) re- 
cognijced their authority as did the Hti-k ?' t^*^ and 26 other states. The 
Yueh-ti removed gradually westwards^^^ until in 143 B.C. they settled for 
a time on the banks of the Oxus. When Han Wu-ti came to the throne 
140 B.C., being desirous of getting rid of the obnoxious Hiung-nus, he 
wished to make an alliance to that effect with his former neighbours the 
Yueh-ti. Tchang-kien, it is well known, was sent in official mission to 
them in 13 9 B.C., but he was stopped on his way for ten years by the 
Hiung-nus ; he finally escaped from their territory to that of Ta-yuan, 
from where he went to Kang-kiu (Samarkand) and reached the Yueh-ti. 
He followed them during their conquest of the Ta-hia, but could not de- 
cide them to resume an offensive action in common against their former 
foes. After a sojourn of one year, he started for his return journey, and 
travelled along the Nan shan. in view of passing through the Kiang 
route, i.e. that leading to Sung pan ting or to Lin-tao. But he was again 
stopped by the Hiung-nus who kept him a prisoner for another year, so 
that he did not reach his native country prior 126 b.c.^^^ 

240. Tchang kien having personally visited the three countries precitcd 
reported upon them, and with additional details on five or six others^*^. 
He spoke of the marvellous Nissean horses, blood perspiring, fed with lu- 
cern in Ta-yuan, and of the products of Shuh (Szetchuen) which through 
India were carried in the Ta-hia country. It was then estimated that 
India could not therefore be far from the South-west of the Empire, and 
that Ta-hia could be thus reached without difficulty.^^o Unsuccessful 
attempts were thus made for several years to pass through the South- 
west border states,^ '^ as the Hiung-nus in the North stopped the way of 
Turkestan. Some partial successes having at last cleared the region of 
the Nan-shan of these indomitable foes, Tchang-kien, on his proposal in 
119 B.C. was sent a second time, as Imperial envoy, with a large retinue 
of official assistants, to negociate an alliance with the Wic;:suns against 
the Hiung-nus and a free intercourse with Ta-yuan, Ta-hia and other 
countries.^^^ He started by the Lin-tao route and reached the Wu-suns 
whom he could not make accept the Chinese proposals. He came back in 
116 B.C. accompanied with a mission from them to China. Whilst 
amongst the Wu-suns he had dispatched his assistant Envoys to Ta-yuan 
Kang kiu, the Yueh-ti and Ta-hia. Nearly all came back about a year 



320 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

later, bringing some ol the natives of these countries with them. " And 
thus, Szema Tsien tells us, the intercourse of China with the countries 
of the ISTorth-west commenced from this time."*^^ 

241. By a singular concourse of circumstances the famous iNisjean 
horses of classical history^si became then the cause of the Chinese power 
being established in Central Asia. It was reported to Han Wu-ti, that 
the King of Ta-yuan (Farghana) kept a large stud of marvellous horses, 
blood perspiring, descending from a heaven's stallion and travelling a 
thousand lis in a day. Their native place was Ni-se^^^ but the capital 
of the kingdom was Kwei-shan (modern Kasan)956 one of the seventy 
cities of the Kingdom. Their name was p'u-shao in which we recognize 
a curtailed transfer of topicha, " the long-necked and long-legged Turko- 
man horse."**" The Chinese envoys could not get any of these horses 
for their Emperor who having been deceived once^^^ finally decided to get 
some of tl'.em at any price^ Military stations were established as far as 
Tun-hwang (N.W. Kansuh) in 109 b,c, to facilitate the intercourse with 
the North-west kingdoms independently of the fortuitous caprice of the 
Hiung-nus.9 59 A special envoy named Tchai-ling was sent with a gol- 
den horse and a thousand kin of gold to purchase one of the much coveted 
horses, but Megas the king of Ta-yuan refused, the envoy was murdered 
and the golden horse stolen. Hostilities were resumed by theHiung-nus and 
an important expedition sent in 104 b.c. was wrecked by them. At last 
in 101 B.C. a large army under the command of Lj_Kwang4i, titled Nis- 
eean general for the purpose, reached Ta-yuan, imposed a treaty and came 
back decimated with ten Niscean horses, which had cost to China fifteen 
years of efforts and sacrifices of all sorts, including a total loss of about 
300000 men. 

242. A circumstance of peculiar interest, also unnoticed, in that 

event, is that Greeks and Chinese came there into contact for the first 

time.^'"''^ Ta 1 uan was then occupied by Greeks. The evidence of this 

fact rests partly on words and names quoted in the Chinese record which 

happen to have an hellenic appearance notwithstanding their Chinese garb. 

Herewith a short list of these words : 

Ch. Muh-tuk, lucern, for mcdihai in Greek*^ ^ 

,, P'u-tao, vine, ,, botrus 

,, 'J'sai-kwa, cucumber, ,, sikuos 

,, Hnvg-li'ia safflower, ,, knikos 

,. Mu-ku, name of the King, „ megas „ great 

Although we may regret that their list si ould not be longer, their 
evidence is sufficiently conclusive, and finds a further confirmation in tie 






CHINESE CIVILISATION. 221 

name of the country itself. Ta-yuan means greater Yuan as shown by the 
contemporary existence of a Siao Yuan or Lesser Yuan, as in tlie case of 
the Ta Yueh~ti and Siao Yueh-ti . The name is therefore Yuan only, 
^liioh, the Archaic dialects indicate, was pronounced Yuen or Yuan, sure- 
ly a transfer of /aow, Greek. ^^2 We must therefore translate Ta Yuan 
or Ta Wan Kwoh, the Greater Greek Country .^^3 

243. The victory of a Chinese Army over Ferghana was a most im- 
portant event in the political history of Central Asia.s^* It gave to the 
Son of Heaven a leading position for two centuries among the potentates 
of that part of the world. Many states recognized his Imperial authority or 
asked for his alliance, and in 59 B.C. a Governor Generalship was establish- 
ed at Wu-ley' (S.W. of present Karashar) had under its supreme juris- 
diction no less than 36 states on the east, north and west of the Tsung- 
ling range.'-'^^ In 51 the outposts extended as far west as Sha-kiu. i.e. 
Yarkand. The Chinese authority on the west of the Pamir range 
was then strong enough to avenge the injuries done to former envoys by 
Hippostratiis,^^^ K'ng of Kophen (Kabuhstan) ; the entreaties o£ the son 
of that king were disregarded, a plot wa's entered with the son of the 
king of the Greeks, Hermctus,-''^'' wiiieli resulted in an attack on the coun- 
try, wlien the king was killed, and Hermanis, receiving the investiture 
from China was enthroned as King of Kophen. 9 at in 1 b.c. by partitions 
and additions, the number of western states bowing to the Chinese Em- 
peror had been increased to fifty, and the Chinese seals and ribbons of 
office were received by no less than 376 officials, chieftains and rulers, 
although several of the more distant states had ceased to do so some time 
before. 9"'!> 

214. The Chinese greatness there was short lived, and less than 75 years 
after tho es'^ablishment of a Governor General of the Si-yi). (West Asia), 
all tlie states beyond Sha-kiu, i.e. Yarkand, had swerved from their for- 
mer allegiance.^ ^"^ This was in the years lG-16 a. n. daring tli£ usurpation 
of Wang Mang. When the Eastern Han dynasty arose at Loh-yang . 
in A.D. 25 the Chinese Government, again engaged against the Hiungnus, 
was unable to interfere, and tlie last faithful states gave it up in 38 and\ 
41 A.D. Later successes over the hereditary foes permitted to resume in- 
tercourse and Imperial interference with the West. Pan-Tchao, the fam- 
ous General, was the chie? agent in the aftair. From 73 to 98, he lestored 
the authority and prestige of the Chinese name in these regions. The 
states of Eastern Turkistan were either compelled or induced to recognize 
their former suzerain, and friendly relations were reopened with the states 



> 



222 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

"West of the Pamir. Paa-Tchao himself, in 97 a.d. went as far as 

HiEN-TU, i.e. ANTiocAza Margiana,^''^ and dispatched his lieutenant 
Kan-yng to the unknown Tats'in,'-^'^'^ while himself returned to Ku-tse, 
y i.e. Kutcha. Kan-yng went as far as the Persian Gulf (not the Caspian 
Sea)'''^ and returned afraid of the sea voyage to the head of the Red Sea 
Pan-Tchao returned to his native land in 102 to die, and five years later 
the dilapidated condition of the Imperial finances caused a withdrawal of all 
the Chinese Representatives and forces beyond the N.W. borders (of pres. 
Kansuh), which resulted in the loss of nearly all the advantages gained 
by the great politic general. Some years afterwards a fresh advance was 
made, an outpost was established at Liu-tching (pres. Lu-ko-ts'in, 60 li 
S.E. of Turfan) in 123, and Yen-Ki, i.e. TCarashar, was conquered in 
126 A.D. ,3^4 but the former position and political influence was not re- 
covered. 

245. Several missions or embassies implying an untold number of priv- 
ate caravans, from the west., at that time, have been recorded in history. 
Among the first in 115 b.c. was: one from Parthia (An-sih) with Ostrich- 
es' eggs of Mesopotamia and jugglers of Lt-kien=:Tleken-^''^ and one from 
the Wu-suns with horses.*^^ In 51 b.c. an Imperial Princess given into 
marriage to the Kun-mi or King of the Wu-suns came back in 105 B.C. 
bringing home the pi-pa or tamburah of Persia. ^^' Missions from Kang- 
Icii (Samarcand) and from Pan-tu (=Parthuva) arrived in 11 b.c.^'s 
Thirteen years later Buddhist books were brought by Y-tsun kou, from the 
Yueh-ti.*'^ The Arsacidfe in a.d. 87 sent lions and /u^^as (hornless unit 
corns. 9^*^ In a.d. 101 the King Bankii of Ansih (i.e. Pacorus II. the 
xxivth Aasacidfe) sent lions and ostriches' eggs. Until four years later 
several envoys from India reached China by the same route. Another 
mission from Parthia arrived in 106,'^^ but any further communications 
were stopped by the revolt of the Si-yii in a.d. 107.^**- The travellers of 
Maes Titianus who went to Sera Metropolis at that time, and supplied 
Marinus Tyrius with the information which appears in Ptolemy, must 
have gone as subservient only to the Parthian envoys, if they have been 
there themselves at all. The details they give about the seven months 
journey from the Stone tower to the Sera Metropolis, as already remarked 
by Ptolemy himself, look like second hand information. ^^3 They rem- 
ained probably at the Stone-Tower, expecting the return of the Parthian 
envoys, as we know from the Chinese side that the Arsacidie were the self- 
made middlemen^^^ betweemthe West traders and the Sera Metropolis, '^^^ 
the Eastern city. 



chinese civilisation. 223 

Notes 

^44) The Hiung-nus appeared for the first time eo nomme in history in 
318 u.c. cf. Szema Tsi'ii, Ske ki, v, '^-i.—They traced the ancestry of 
their chiefs to Shun-tr(ji a descendant of the Chinese Royal family of • 
HiA, who had removed from China a thousand ,. y ears hefore the time 
ofTou-man, their Shen-yu in 209 B.C. (cf. She h, fol. 9, and Tsien 
Han shii, kiv. 94)— Klaproth and Remnsat have taken them to be 
Turks, became the Tuh-kiuh i ancient Tol-knl, Tiil-ktoet), whose 
words in Chinese books are really Turk, are said in the same books to 
have been descendants of Hiung-nus. So are said to be the Kao-kiu 
or Uigurs, the Pulol-i and the Kun-mi ; the Tungusic To-pah are 
said also to have the same origin as the Hiung-nus. (Cf. T.P.Y.L., 
791, 12 ; 801, 1 v., 4.) Now the Pido/ci and Kun-mi were not Turks. 
Moreover in twelve words of the Hiung-nu language given iu the She- 
ki, two or three only are Turk, two are Tungusic. The Hiung-nus -^ 
seem to have been a political, not a racial__unity. — Cf. also T. de L., — 
Khan, Khakan, and other Tartar titles, 1888, note 31. 
■45) The Yueh-ti were spoken of first in the geographical work of Y-yn 
(Shang dynasty) cf. Pih yuen, Shan hat king, comm. 13, 1 r. — In 
2(>9 B.C. they were in a flourishing condition in Kansuh, N.W. (cf. 
She ki, 113, 6 v.). 

946) Klaproth mistook these for the Hu-^e, identified by him with the 
Goths. 

947) In 143 B.C. their neighbours compelled them to move again fur- 
ther west and it was then that they reached the Oxus. They were 
sinicised to some extent and carried with tliem not a few Chinese 
notions. They had a coinage of Chinese pattern, on which cf. my 
paper Une monnaie Bactro-Chinoise bihiigue (hi j^remier Steele ai\ n.e. 
(Extr. Cte-R. Acad. Inscript. 1890), pp. 7, 14, Two specimens are 
known apparently of ditferent date. A small one which must have 
been issued chiefly among the Yueh-ti. A larger one of later date 
which bears apparently the name of Hermoeus in Bactro-Pali, and may 
have been issued when this king was instated by the Chinese about 
51 B.C. (Below par. 243). The previous existence of the Chinese 
type of coinage it represents, introduced by the Yueh-ti, would justify 
its maintenance in that circumstance, instead of the newer type of the 
Han dynasty. 

948) Cf. Szema Tsien. She kt, 123, i-d. — Tsien Han shu, kiv. Gl. 

949) Such is the precise statement of the She ki, 123, 2 r. — He had 
passed also through Kang-kii, and reported upon the An-sih, 
(Arsacida). 

950) Cf T. de L., Tin-yut, not India : Acad., May 2. and India from 
China : ibid. Sept. 5, 1885. 

951) On these attempts, see below, par. 269. 

952) It was then that he visited the alledged sources of the Hwang-bo, the 
Sing su hai or Oduntala, i.e. Starry Sea, which he thought was in com- 
munication underground with the Pu-tchang Hai or Lopnor, and mad- 
the Hwang-ho a continuation of the Tarym. The most interesting in- 
formation on the subject has been translated by M. Guluy in bis DeQ 
scription de la Chine Occidentale, Suppl. ; Museon, Oct., 85, p. G12-7. 

953) She Ki, Kiv, 123, fol. 8, 9, 9v. 



224 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

954) These were the large horses personally used by the Kings of Persia 
and the Princes, which Herodotus (i., 497 ; iii., 106 ; iv., 39) and other 
classical writers have described, as horses of Nisa in Media : Strabo, 11; 
Aristot., De Hist. Aiiim., 9; Anim. Marcell, 23, 6 ; Eustath, ad Dio- 
nys. Per. ; Appian, 1. — On an early history of these horses, cf. W. St. 
Chad Boscawen, The Horses of Namar : B. & 0. R., vi., 139-40.— 
The NisEean plain famous for its horses must have been near Beliistun, 
as Alexander passed it on his way from Opis to Ekbatana (Cf A.H. 
Sayce, Herodotus. 282. 

955) This name and the consequences which ensue for the identification 
of the horses has hitherto been passed unnoticed by furmer Sinologists 
because they have been satisfied to read it with the corrupted sounds of 
the present day, eul-she. er-she, urh-she in Pekinese and Mandaiin, 
and therefore did not perceive its historical interest. A^i-se (10434- 
8430 Bas.) is still at present read ni-sz in the Shanghai, nhi-soai in 
the Sino-Annamite, and similar sounds in other archaic dialects. The 
prt sent sound er in Chinese was ni in the Buddhist transcriptions as 
shown in Stan. Julien, Methode, Nos. 266, 2,68-9 ; Eitel, Sanskr. Chin. 
Did., p. 83, &c. 

950) Kasan, now a small place N.W. of Namaghan, was formerly the 
capital if Ferghana, according to the early Arabian geographers. Cf. E. 
Bretschneider, Medicev. Res., ii., 52. 

957) T'obicJi'a. cf. topchaq in Shaw, Vocabulary of the Turki language, 
p. 71 ; Pavet de Courteille, Mem. de Baber, pref. ;E. Bretschneider, 
M.R., i., 140, ii., 125, 26i. These horses are now called Arghamak 
in Samarcand, but there seems to be some differences in the breed, (cf 
Edw. Balfour, Cyclop, of India, ii, 109).— The Turkoman horse has been 
often described, and lately by Heinrich Moser, Le Pays des Turcomans, 
Rev. 2. Mond. 15 Mai, 1885, and in his large work Durch Central- 
asien, Leipzig, 1888. — La faculte de suer du sang que Ton salt aujour- 
d'hui etre due a I'existence de filaires longs d'environ un denii raillm. 
pourrait etre moins rare qu'en le croit; elle a ete tres souvent constatee 
sur les chevaux hongrois. Cf. C.A. Pietrenient, Les cheraux dans les 
temps pre'hif!tori(ji/es et historiques, 1883, p. 29. 

958) The Wu-suns had sent him some of their own horses which at first 
were received as celestial horses, but tho superchery was discovered on 
the return of other envoys. (Cf. Shi Ki, 123, 28 ; Tsien Han shu, 41, -i \ 

959) Envoys were then sent to Ansikfie. the Arsacidian Empire: Yen- 
tsai, i.e. the Aorsi, N. of Parthia : Li-kien, i.e. Rekem, the emporium 
N. of the Red Sea : Tiao-tchi, i.e. the Arab settlements N. of the 
Persian Gulf, and Shen-tuh, i.e. India. Cf. Tsien Han shu, kiv, 61, 
fol. 4 , Wylie, Western Regions, 51. — For Aorsi and Rckom. cf. F. 
Hirth. China and the Roman Orient, p. 139, 157. — Perhaps that Li- 
kien was Rakkan in Persian. 

9G0) Strabf), xi. 11, tells us that the Greek Kings of Bactriana extend- 
ed their dominion as far as the country of the Seres. Cf. Reinaud, 
Relations 2}olitigues et commerciales de VEmpire Romain avec VAsie 
Orieutale, p.* 11.^. Of course we must understand countries under the 
dominion of the Seres fo the time being. Does this refer to the Sias 
or Lesser Ytian ? See below in 963. 

91)1) The Lucern had been called medikat by the Greeks because it 
had been brouijht from Media at the time of the Persian wars, about 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 225 

470 B.C. ; in Contral Asia its native names are B/sJika, Shai^ta, is/'Sty 
wliicli leave no duubt on the Greek origin of the Chinese word. Of. A.. 
Candulle, Origin of Cultivated jdants, p. 10^ ; V. Hehn, Wanderings 
of Plants, p. MOG — The comparison with botru)^ and medihii was first 
made bj Mr. Ivingsmill of Shanghai. — Two more words from Ta- 
yuan are quoted, hut one seems to refer to an old Persian and Sanskrit 
words : such as ho-tao for walnut tree ; cf. aklwda ; and one to Turki 
pu-shao, horse, cf. topicha. 

962)Ur. J. Edkins, Pliilological importance of Geographical terms in the 
She-kl : J. Ch. Br. R.A.S., 1886, xxi, 200, says.- Greek Kingdom in 
Ferghana, TFan (Javan). 

1)63) Ihe identification of Yuan with Y aun or Greek, gives interest to the 
existence of tlie Siao Yuan with their cajiital Yii-ling or Han-ling, 
consisting of 150 families, 1050 people, 200 soldiers, at 7210 11 from 
Tchangngan; and at 2558 li N.W. was the seat of the Governor General. 
(Cf. Tsien Han Shu, 96 ; A. W3'lie, Western Pegio7is, h). Shen-shen 
was at 6100 li and Khotan at 9670 li from Tchang-ngan. The Siao 
Yuan were on the r(jute North of Tibet, between these two places. Yii- 
ling should be one of the buried cities, and looks like a small colony of 
Greeks. 

964) After the Ta-yuon war, Chinese posts and militar\ colonies had 1 
been established at Lun-tat or Round Tower, (at 680 lis=iy4 modern 
lis, West of Yen-ki or Karashar, near present Bugur according to 
Father Hyacinth ap. E. Bretschneider, Medicev. Res., i., 16) and at 
Yu Kiii-'t, near Turfan, where a Deputy Protector had his residence, cf, 
l'sie')i Han shu, IK!, I ; A, Wylie, Western Regions, 3 ; and De Mailla. 
Hist. Gen., iii., 75. 

965) This measure was taken after the defection from the HJimgnus ana\ 
the submission to China of a Hiungnu Prince with 50000iallowers«. Cf. '^ 
Li tat 2'1 Wang nien piao. — 2'sien Hun Shu, K'v. 94. — A. Wylie,, 
Heung-noo, 451.. — De Guignes, Hist, 'des Huns, 2, 86. — De Mailla 
Hist. Gcn..m., 140. — The office of Slaves Protector General which had 
rej laced the former was then suppressed and a Governor General ap- 
pointed instead. — Wu-ley, his new residence was near the present Kur- 
la, S.W. of Karashar, on the pass of the Kuruk-tagh (figured on 
n^ap 19 in E. Reclns, Asie Orientate, 113). 

966) In Chinese Bu To Lo. 

Greek hi PPosT Ratos. 

967) In Chinese mod. Yn-muh-fu (=Yn-mu-vu for Yr-niu- vu)=7?7- 
maion, the Greek name. — The Chinese word is Yung-kiu=.Y OMn^ki, 
the country of the Greeks. Cf. Ed. Drouin, Notice sur la Bactriane, 
p. 16 for these two identifications. Cf. suprd note 947. 

968) Cf. Tsien Han Shu, Kiv. 9C ; Wylie, Western Regions, p. 17. 
Wen-tchung, the Chinese envoy wlio had installed Hermseus, having- 
returned to China to report on his mission was replaced by the Mar- 
quis Tcbao-tih who had difficulties with Hermseus and was kil'ed with 
his retinue of 70 persons. Han Yuan-Ti who had just ascended the 
throne refused to interfere because of the distance and the difficulty of 
the route through Badakshan. In -5 b.c. under his successor a re- 
quest from Kophen received a similar answer. Cf. Tsien Han Shu, k\y. 
96 ; Wylie, Western Regions, p. 17-18. 

969) Cf. Li Tai Ti Wang nien pvxo. — And the previous note. 



4 



226 CHINESE CIVILISATION. 

^70) This occurred successively in the years 10, 13, and 16 a.d. 

971) We have here a fresh instance of the double suggestion of sound 
and suitable meaning in the transfer of a foreign name. The two 
Chinese characters Hien tn (7981-11240 Bas.) mean ' Metropole of 
district.' 

D72J Cf. h'fra, par. 268. 

973; Cf. F. Hirth, China and the Roman Qrient, p. 3, 13, 138, 164. — 
Also E.C. Taintor, Advance of a Chinese General to the Caspian Sea: 
Notes and Queries, 1868, p. 60-62, and A. Wylie, ibid. p. 153 fur the 
various texts on the subject. 

974) Cf. LI ta'i. Ti Wang men plao, s. a. — De Mailla, Ilt'st. Gen., iii., 
417, 423. — E. Bretschneider, Medicev Res., ii., 184. 

975) On Li-kien = Reken, cf. /'n&a par. 2G3,— She-Ki, kiv. 123. 

976) She h'l, 123, S. — Tsien Han Shu, 41, 4. 

977) Cf. Pa yuenpipa sil. T.P.Y.L., 583, 3.— De Guignes, Hist, de 
Huns, ii., 61.— Mayers, Chinese R.M. 872. 

978) Li tai Ti Wang nienpiao. 

979) Sapra, note 912. 

980) Hou Han Shu,, kiv. 88.— F. Hirth, Chin, and Ro7n. Or., 39. 

981) Si yii tchi. — Cf. Pauthier, Examen Methodique, J.A. Oct.,. 1839, 
p. 266, 28i. 

982) De Guignes, ///s^. f/^s Huns,\., 31, and previous paragraph. 

983) Cf. On this point the History of Ancient Geography, by E Bunbury, 
ii, 529-531. 

984) Supra note 930. 

985) No satisfactory explanation has been given as yet of the name of 
Seres, Sera, Serica. The name appeared in Western writers (not since 
Ktesias where it is an interpolation, but) since ApoUodorus of Arte- 
mita (of the 1st cent. b.c. in liis lost History of Parthia), Virgil and 
many others. t was known in North India at the time of Kanishka 
and in Ceylon in the 1st cent. Pausanias in the second rentury sspeaks 
of the ffreat river Ser in that countrv. The same writer, Hesvchius, 
Photius, Clemens Alexandrinus, and others say that ser is a worm and 
also a nation. Klaproth in Journal Asiatique of 1823, p, 243, R.G. 
Latham, On the existence of a nation hearing the name of Seres in 
JDlassical Museum, 1846, and Reinaud, L'L!7nptre Rnmain et VAsie 
(Orientale : J.A. Mars 1863, p. 123, have suggested the own name of 
■the silk, se Chines, sir Korean, sirek Mongolian, and Si!7-(7^e'Mandshu. 
We may add dar Tibetan, and should we tru!>t the oldest Chinese phon- 
etic spelling which wrote the word occasionally s/«o + l?/. (litt. small 
bone) the present Chinese se would be an abraded sound of SsL for 
S<?R. But the final was lost in Chinese long before our era. — The sug- 
gested etymology however ingenious cannot be accepted as it is not 
supported by any evidence that China has ever been so called by any 
of those nations through which only the name of Seres could have been 
learned by the travellers of the West. Moreover it Is not suitable for 
the name of the great river of the land, the Hwang-ho or Yellow 
river. Now let us remark that yellow is ser in Tibetan, sari in 
Turki, s/w?-rt in Mongolian, and thereTore that the name of the river 
was thus translated. Besides the name of the Seres was learned by the 
Singalese traders travelling North as well as by the travellers coming 
through the North-west highways, Tibetans were on the route on both 



\^ 



227 

sides, and it is from their language that a name given to their east- 
ern neighbours should have been learned. Such indeed was the case, 
as the same word as for yellow means East, Eastern, sAor in Tibetan. 
Yellow is also a natural colour for silk. We can thus understand 
how the confusion arose in the explanations of travellers. Furthermore 
there is evidence that the !North-west of China was so called by for- 
eigners, and I do not know if the name of Sharshen since the Han 
dynasty is not a survival. Suh now Suh-tchou of Kansuh was an old 
name of the region which was SoL for SoR, as shown by its archaic 
phonetic spelling and outside evidence. On the latter cf. my paper 
on The Diurtchen of Mandsliuria, part i.— The Sung-p'an-ting traders, 
in the present day are called shar-ba, among the Golok and other Ti- 
betan tribes of N.E. Tibet. Cf. W. Woodville Rockhill, Tibet from 
Chinese Sources : J.R.A.S., Jan. 1891, p. 89 n. — It means simply in- 
habitant of an eastern country. Cf. Jaeschke, Tibet. Diet., p. 557. 



Chap. VII. —Sixth Pkriod : 221 b.c— a.d. 220. 

Sect. C. Private trade and Official opening of inland intercourse loith 
the West, (cout.) 

246. It is difficult to appreciate in detail all the western things and 
notions that came to China through the frequent relations which occurred 
after the openings of 126 and 115 B.C. West Asia was then in the hands 
of the Greeks, of the Parthians, of the Romans and of the Buddhists. 
The old Persian culture had disappeared, as had before the older Assyro- 
Babylunian which had become niythical^^Sgayg Jq qj^q placeS^^ ; they were 
no more in current use and could not be transmitted through common 
intercourse of politicians, still less of soldiers or of merchants. This state 
of things limitates the character of the items of western culture which 
can have reached the Chinese Empire duringthat period. The Greek char- 
acter of several of the innovations has already been pointed out^^**, and 
some more will have undoubtedly to be added to the list by the progress 
of research. 

247. Thanks to the great care always paid by the Chinese to botany^*^ 
and to their numerous records on the matter, we know approximately 
which new plants and fruits were then introduced from the Si Yu to the 
Flowery Land. Herewith a short list of them : lucern, vine, cucumber 
and safflower, with their Greek names* »^, walnut tree, with its Aryan 
name ; hu-tou or common bean, hu-sui or parsley, hu suan or great gar- 
lic^*^, hu-ma or sesamum identified with that introduced earlier by the sea 
trade'-'^^. and the an-shih hi, or nar of the Arsacid^, i.e. the pomegran- 
ate^33 and others. In 87 i;,c., the king of Tueh-tt, from W. Asia where 



230 ORIGIN OF THK EARLY 

they had removed sent four oz. of a most valuable spice called King- 
tstng9^*, and produced bv a tree growing in the island of 7^ sii-kwot in the 
Western Ocean^^^. 

248. Amongst the most interesting articles then introduced from the 
West inland was amber which came then first to the knowledge of the 
Chinese. Han Wu-ti was presented by one of the western emissaries 
who accompanied the assistant envoys of Tchang-kien on their return^^^, 
with a swallow made of Amber and with pieces of the same precious 
material^ ^''. It was in Kophen r Kabul istan) that according to the 
reports, Amber could be procured^ ^^, and in the Chinese hu-peh for 
Amber we should see a distant imitation of the native term which has 
become the Persian kehr ibar^^^ . In the following century Amber came 
through the South sea trade {Infra §274). 

We may be sure that many additions will have to be made to these 

prehminary lists 1 y subsequent researches. For instance alum shale or 

Jan-shfh, now an article of export, was then imported in the Middle King- 

^Qmiooo^ through Wu-tu^^'^^, a district of S.W. Kansuh established in 

111 B.C. in view of commanding the route there from the West. 

Notes 

986) Cf. for instance the ignorance of Herodotus, Ctesias and others, on 
history and accurate notions. 

■987) At Babylon, chiefly in the great temple E-sag-gil. — The latest 
cuneiform tablet at present known was dated in the 5th year oi Pa- 
corus, K/nff of Persia, i.e. 5.5-56 a.d., as shown in my monograph on 
L^ Ere de.t Arsacides en 248 av. J. C. selon les Inscriptions Cuneiformes, 
1891, p. S3-85. 

-988) Supra, § 2:^.5-237, notes 926, 933, 934, 937-939.— Tt cannot be a 
coincidence that at this very moment when Greek influence was pene- 
trating into their land that the Chinese should have felt the necessity 
of reforming their calendar. In 104 b.c. the reform was made ac- 
cording to views of their own with the help of foreign notions per- 
mitting a greater accuracy than before. Szema Tsien, the Ta she ling 
or Great Astrologer, in his She ki, built up from relics of Antiquity a 
system of astrological calendar which was not put into use. Cf. on 
this calendar, Le Calendrier des Yn, by E. Chavannes : J. A., Nov. 
Dec. 1890, p. 463 . '>!(».— The 7'W tc/i/i calendar established in 104 
was based upon an alleged relation between the measure of time and 
musical proportions on a scale of 81 divisions. Cf. Tsien Han shu : 
kiv. xxi. 

-989) For instance Han Wu-Ti, in 138 b.c. collected in the park of 
Shang-lin near the capital Tchang-ngan, all the plants and fruits which 
C"uld be gathered from all parts of the Empire, numbering 3000, (cf. 
san fii hwang tn, iv, 1 ?;) n^t all different. The poet and statesman 
Szema Siang-ju who was present at the opening of the park, described 
it in a poem, some parts of which have been preserved by Szema Tsien, 



CIirNESE CIVILISATION. 231 

She Ki, kiv. 117, fol. 5 sq.; miuierous names mentioned tliere, when 
identified, cannot fail to be highly interesting. 

990) Cf. supra, § 242. — For all these names and identifications, cf. E. 
Bcetschneider, On the studji and value of Chinese botanical icorks, p. 
15 ; Botanicnm S'nicam. ii, 29, 35 5. — Also Pen tsao kang muh ; Ilan 
shii ; Foh wih tchi ; iVw ping yii Ian, 996, 3, r. — The hu there denotes 
the bearded populations of the west. 

991) The small i;arlic had been introduced by the Early Chinese civili- 
se rs. Cf. infrd. 

992) This hu ma or sesamum which was known by that name to Hwai- 
nan-tze wlio died ll'l B.C., was first eaten by one Lu-an-sheng in the 
Tchang-lo palace of Tchang-an. Cf. San fu hivang tu, iii, 7 i\ and 
ii, 2 ; T.P.Y.L., 989, 5 r. — On the earUer introduction of Sesamum, 
cf. mpva § 203 ; for the identification of hu-ma with the older Ku-sheng 
cf. tlie Wu she pen tsao : T.P., Lc. 

993) Cf. my note on The Pomegranate from Persia to China, 116 i?.c. 
in B.&O.R., vi, 239-24-0. The fruit was coming then from Tu-lim, 
for I'nrira, one of the two satrapies which the Arsacida3 had wrested 
from Eucratides {Straho, XI, ii, 2). — The pomegranates of Khodjend 
were famous in the middle ages as sliown in E. Bretschneider, Medioev. 
Res., i, 19-20, but the Chinese sources of the 1st cent, do not mention 
it amongst the products of Ferghana and suggest therefore that it 
was not yet cultivated there. 

994) King-tsing (125S0-7698 Bas.) or Essence of fri^-ht, also called 
tchen-ling-wan or marvellous pills for awe, fan-sheng hang or return- 
ing-life spice, kioh-se hiang or rej cting-death spice. — Tlie name of the 
island, mod. Tsii-kuh, 8365-7312 Bas., anc. Tsu-kwet, may be that 
of Socotra. The identification of this spice thus earned through the 
sea and continent would be interesting. — On a use of that drug un- 
der Han Wti-ti, therefore in 87 B.C. his last year, cf. T.P. 981, 3. 

995) Shih tchou ki.'-T.P.Y.L., 983, 7, 

996) Supra, § 240. 

997) Wang tze nien, Shih y ki. — Shen-yoh, Sung c«Ait.r=T.P.Y.L., 
808, 1-2. — The amber in pieces was mounted into a golden pillow for 
Li Kiian, the fav.irite concubine of the Emperor. Ibid. 

998^ Tsieii Han shu, 9 J, Si yli tchuan, Art. Ke-pin. — In the Si yil tchu 
kwoh tchi, of a.d. -^OO, we hear of a fable connecting amber with burnt 
wasps' nets of the Sandy bank of tlie river of Mu-lu or Merv. 
This river is the Murgab. (Cf. T. P. Y. L. 808, 2). Does this 
not refer to the ants, flies and other insects often f 'und embed- 
ded into it which show that it belongs to late tertiary age. — The 
amber trade from the north-sea and Baltic shores began early as shown 
by the beads of Baltic amber found at Mycena? (cf. Schliemann's Ex- 
cavations by Dr. C. Schuchhardt, p. 196). — Amber, according to Per- 
rot-Chipiez has been found everywere in Italy, doubtfully in Sardinia, 
and not in Egypt, Assyria, Syria nor Cyprus. (Ci. Hist. Art Ant. 
i, 840 ; ii, 768-9 : iii, ^'54-5 ; iv, 103 .' Cf. also D'.'^rbois de Jub- 
ainville, Les Premiers habitants de V Europe, 1889, p. 330-2.- 0. 
Schrader, Z'lr Bernstetnfrage : Naturwiss. Beitr. z. Geogr. n. Ktiltnr- 
gesch. Dresden, 1888, p. 177, sq. — Kirwan, Les Conijeres, ii, 25 ; V. 
Fouinel, Vieux Nevf, iii, 668.— Prof. Clifford AUbutt has lately lec- 
tured on The trade in Amber in Ancient times : Cambridge-Antiquarian 



233 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

Societ}^ May 17, 1893, It seems that Amber ^vas found also in 
other places. Ctesias in 400 B.C. spoke of amber found near a river 
Hypobarus in India, which is a corrupt information, as no amber has 
ever been found in India (E. Bunbury, Hist. Anc. Geogr., vol.i.) It 
refers probably to the Red Amber of the Kicobars, where its al)und- 
ance has made it an object of trade since an unknown date (cf. Rashid- 
eddin (1300") and Barbossa (I5l0), in Yule-Burnell, Gloss. Anglo- 
Indian, p. 47S. Cf. also Hiii>ob(trus with Barusai, name of tlie Nico- 
bars in Ptolemy. — A Chinese itinerary of tlie Ming j)eriod speaks of 
Amber in Oman, (cf. E. Bretschneider, Chinese intercourse with the 
countries of C. and W. Asia i'.i tlie Ibth cent., Part ii, 1877), and the 
statement has been confirmed by the recent discoveries of large cpianti- 
ties of Amber in that region. Perhaps it was also alluded to in Pliny, 
37, 39 when he speaks of the amber of Carmanice (Kerman, East 
South of the Persian Gulf, not Germunia?). Dr. A. B. Meyer, ]Vurde 
Bernstein von Hinterindien nnch dem Westen exportirt ? Dresden, Isis, 
1893, who has collected there besides the passages of Ctesias and Pliny 
alluded to here, some other statements from ancient Authors, thinks 
that they refer to tbe amber of Burma. But we cannot accept this 
.suggestion, because Burmese amber was not known at that time. — Cf. 
besides: K.G. Jacob: Neue Beltrage zum Studmrn des Kasp sch-balt- 
isch'in Handels in M-ttle-alter, I. Neue Studium ; den Bernstein im 
Orient hetreffend : Z.D.M.G., xliii., 353-87.— W. Fischer, Der Weg 
des steinzeitlichen B ei-nstem- Handel s : Globus, ix., 2G8f., 1?91.— L. 
Wilser, Benistein U'ul Bronze in den Urzeit, 1892 Globus, Ixi., 184- 
6. — O. Sclineider, Noclimals zur Bernstein/rage, 1H91 : Z.D.M.G., 
xlv,, 239-44. — P. Orsi, Ufher pra'historischen Bernstein aus Sicihen, 
1892: Z. f. Ethnol., xxiii,, 690 f. 

999) Cf. F. Hirth. Boman Orient, p. 245. 

1000) The alum-shale, Fan-shih or treillis-stone, also called yil nieh or 
feather-mud, is mentioned in the Pen-Ts'ao, 100 B.C. as coming from 
the West of the Ho, and in the Fa7i Ize ki jan of our era as imported 
through Wu-tu. Later on it came through S.W. Kansuh (Lung-ti).— 
It is only in tlie 5th cent, that we hear of alum found in China, at 
Kien-ping (mod. Wu-shan in N.E. Szetchnen) according to the King 
tchou ki by Tcheng Hung-tchi. Cf. T.P.Y.L. 988, 4. — Fourteen lo"- 
calities of alum are mentioned in Pumpelly's list. The great impor- 
tation of alum is now from C'liina. Edw. Balfour, C?/c/o/>. Ind. i, S4. — 
The source of the imported Fan shth is not stated. Let us remark 
that the famous Fehshan, near Kutcha produces alum. 

1001) Wu-tu, was 80 li W. of pres. Tcheng. in Kiai-tchou near the 
borders of Tibet, on the frontiers of Kansuh and Szetchucn. Its jmsi- 
tion was important as commanding the routes. Supra n. 919. 



Sect. D. Foreign Sea-trade and Officicd opening of the South. 
a) South-East and South. 

249. Thi' Hivang-tchi or yellow fingered sea-traders of Hormuz contin- 
ued to frequent the non-Chiuese coasts of South China until the conquest 
of the latter and their reduction in Chinese provinces, 111 b.c. As was 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 233 

tlio case for the previous centuries, the re is generally the same absence 
of Records, hut tlie imported objects are historical witnesses of the Indo- 
Pcrsiaii trade with the Non-Chinese states of the South which was then 
going on, and of the arrival of other competitors In the field as we shall 
see further on.'^°-' 

250. On the South-East the states of Tung-hai in Tchehkiang and 
of Min-yueh in Fuhkien had acknowledged the Suz?rainty of the First 
Chinese Emperor. In lt)2, the first of the two, faithful to the Han 
dynasty saw its name changed into Tung-ngoii, and in 138 its population 
removed into Anhwei. The Min-ijueh, on the contrary was submitted 
to the Empire of Nan-yueh from 179 to 1J38 e.g. ; it was then rebaptized 
Tuiig-yueh, and finally conquered in 110 B.C. by the Chinese, who how- 
ever did not occupy it and left it vacant, i.e. in the hands of the natives, 
after liaving removed all the chiefs and leaders. 

251. On the South was the Empire of Nan-Yueh, founded in 201 
B.C. by Tchao-t'o a rebel general of She Hwang-ti.i^^^ Having assumed 
authority over the territory corresponding to the mo dern provinces of 
Kwang-tung and Kwang-si,^'^'^^ he proclaiihed himself Martial king of 
Nan-yueh, a title which was acknowledged by the Chinese in 195 when 
Luli-kia was sent for that purpose on Mission to him.^'^os jf^ 179 j^^y. 
ing extended his dominion over the Min-yueh in the East, and in the 
West over the Kingdom o{ Ngou-Lo,^^^^ he assumed the Imperial dignity, 
which however was never admitted by the Chinese in their dealings with 
him. The Ngou-lo was the present Tung-king and part of Annam, 
Tchao-t'o died in 137 and 26 years later under his 4th successor, his 
empire was conquered and annexed by the Chinese who divided it into 
nine provinces. 

On the west stood the Ivingdom of Tsen in Yunnan commanding the 
Shan-Burmese trade route, which must be reserved for later paragraphs 
(272 fi".). 

It was necessary to notice these general circumstances to appreciate 
more easily the following importations which occurred at that time be- 
fore the Chinese conquest, and thus save a repetition of the facts. 

252. Sugar-of-palm was heard of in China before the Sugar of Cane. 
A fabled entry in the Shan Hat hing, concerning the Puh-se Min or 
Immortals (i.e. the Richis who eat the Soma or drug immortality^oov) 
tells us that the sweet tree is their food. It was part of the tales told 
by the Erythraean sea traders. 1°°^ Ku-yuen in the Li-sao (314 B.C.) 
speaks o\ the tche-tsiang, or sweet-of-tree, which is understood as a refer- 



234 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

ence to the same sort of Sugar, then introduced in the Ts'u kingdom. 

S u g ar-o J-C a n e, called in Chinese Shek-mih or Stone honey was 
not heard of before the beginning of the Empire, A doubtful tradition 
says that the Hindu Sramanas of Shantungi^*^^ were supplied with some 
shekAwwej for their own wants. A more satisfactory statement is that 
Wu-tchu,'o^'' hing of Min-yueh, whose capital city was at Tung-yeh (pres. 
Fulitchou of Fuhkien) sent to Kao-tsu, founder of the Han dynasty, 
therefore within the years '-01-195 B.C., two huh measures of shek-mih or 
Sugar. ^"^^^ It was reknown to dissipate, the bad effects of intoxication. 
The next importation took place by the central route of the West, as 
about 100 B.C., shek-f/, also sugar-of-cane, was to be found at Wu-tu^'^^^ 
of S.W. Kansuh). In the two names, the sound shek is prominent and 
represents undoubtedly the Sanskrit name Sarkara of the article. India 
was for long the sole sugar producing country, ^^'^ Sugar-cane which is 
not indigenou? in Indo-China,^''^* was only introduced there afterwards, 
•^°'^ and in China, near Canton, not before 28 3 a.d., from Cambo- 
dja.1016 

253. Another trade of older standing with the same mariners was that 
cf big pearls from the Persian Gulf.^'^^' One Tchu-tchuiig, in 187-140 
B.C. was trading in pearls at Kwei-ki.^^^^ A pearl of three inches was 
worth 500 kin of gold, of fnur inches 700 kin of gold. About 156 B.C. 
the same merchant had several tens of pearls of three inches.^°^^ 

ii54. The rising of the Nan-yueh kingdom attracted the foreign trade 
to the region of present Canton as shown by the following instances of 
Indo-Persian articles. 

Jasmine, Chinese ye-si-ming, from the Persian yasemin was found 
in Nan-yueh by Luh-kia, the Chinese envoy to Tchao-t'o in 195 b.c. He 
rep(jrted that the ye-si-ming and the mo-U, both ^ragrant plants had been 
introduced by bearded foreigners Qiujen) of the West, and adopted there 
because the local grains had no taste and the flowers no fragrancc^^^o 
Mo-li, from the Tamil Mallai is the Jasminum Sambac.^"^' 

255. In 179 b.c. the King of Nan-yueh sent to the Chinese Em()er- 
ors, as presents^^^^ : a pair of pih, or round rank-token, of white gtra, 
lOoO kingfishers, ten horns (of rhinoceros), 500 purple cowries, a case of 
cassia grnbo^^^-'', 40 pairs of living kingfisliers, and two pairs of peacocks. 
The last article is interesting. It is one of the first appearances of 
these much vaunted birds exported by Indian trade since the days of 
Salomon'^^*. Tlie length of the journey and lack of comfort at sea on 
the smaller ships of older times had probably prevented their successful 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 235 

importation as far as China witli any regularity^''^'', 

256. The next western products were corals and henna. Corals, 
which appeared c. liO u.c 102 e^j. [,efore. indicate a new source of sea-trade, 
if not tlie appearance of new sea-traders. Tchao-t'o, king of Nan-yueh 
(d. in 187 u.c.) sent to Han Wu-ti for tlie Tsih tsao pond of the Shang- 
lin park, inaugurated in 138 B.C., four hundred and sixty-two stalks of 
coral, sJian~hu, which were arranged into a large tree, 12 spans high, 
having one stern and three branches. This coral was of the red sort as 
shown by the name given to it by Tchao-t'o ^0:7^ and therefore must have 
come from the Mediterrana?an, the only sea where true red coral, coral- 
Hum rubriim, is founc^^^^. This name fimg-Jio (litt. beacon-fire tree, 
shu) reminds us of the Hind. Manga, while the other name, sham hu, 
transmitted from its native country is probably a corruption of a Semitic 
word connected with the hebrew ramuth. We learn therefore from these 
names that the coral in question was carried by the Red Sea trade to 
one of tlie eniporia of the Indian coast and from there to China. The 
circumstance is interesting as a forerunner of the arrival of the Red Sea 
traders themselves, if it does not indicate it as an actual fact. 

257. Henna, the Lawsonia alba, in Chinese the finger nail flower, 
tchi-kia hwci (probably from the Skr. sakachera), was brought by bearded 
foroj^ners (said by a later source to be from the Tats' in KwoK) who plant- 
ed it in Nan-hai^'^^^ (South of Kwangtung and Kwangsi), perhaps at 
the same time as corals or more likely some time afterwards.^^^*^ It is 
spoken only because of its fragrance, although the name is suggestive 
enough of its use by the foreigners, and the fact of its plantation is in- 
teresting, since it was the plant of the Hwang-tchi or Yellow fingers of 
Hormuzia. 

258. In 127 b.c.^'^^i gome fragrant plants shen-tstng, also called tsuan- 
mii (from an origmal word connected with the Arab siimbuiy^''^, were 
brought from the country of Po-d;t^'^^^ (in N.W. Sumatra). This I take 
to be Nard. The event suggests some remarks. The necessarily fre- 
quent stations of the mariners in the Sunda isles for revictualling on their 
route to Chinese lands led gradually to the establishment of regular sta- 
tions, which in some cases developed into small colonies. It may be that 
this place was one of them which had temporarily acquired some import- 
ance. 

Notes 

10 '2) Cf. below par. 256. 

lUUa) Cf. Mayers, Chinese R.M., 727, 234, 50. 



236 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

1004) Tu sui. the first general sent in 220 by She Hwang-ti to con- 
quer the South was killed in 218 in fighting not far from Canton. 
His successor Jen Hiao was successful and conquered in 215 the re- 
gions of Kwei-lin, Nan-hai and Siang-ktim, corresponding to the 
provinces of Kwangtuiig a id Kwangsi, but not bej^ond as sometimes 
stated by unaware writers. Jen Hiao died in 209 and advised Tchao- 
t'o to make himself independent, which he did the same year. 

1005) She Ki, 113, 2 r. 

1006) Ibid. fol. 3. 3 v. — Tchao-t'o declared himself having extended his 
authority eastwards as stated, and in the west as far as the Ngou-Lo 
state. The denominations in tlie historical geography Hoang viet dia 
du chi of Annam, show that the two provinces of Nan-hai and Siang 
were extended in a somewhat curious, though intelligible manner. The 
Nan-hai extended from Kwaiigtung along the sea-coast over the delta 
of Tungking. The Siang kiun which comprehended the savage and 
unruly parts, extended, south of Kwei-lin or North Kwangsi, through 
the centre of the province westwards around the Nan-hai kiun and 
southwards oi the delta as far as the present Nghe-an province. — The 
Ngou-lo kwoh had been founded in the middle of the third cent, 
among the Lo-yueh at Ki kien (near pres. Si-ngan in S.W. Kwangsi) 
by a S(m of a former King of Shuh (destroyei in .31 6 j who assumed 
the title of An-yang wang. He figures in the Annam history as the 
second dynasty called Thuc, and the house of Tchao-t'o, as the third 
dynasty called Trieu. 

1007) Cf. par. 122, notes 455-458, 475. 

1008) Shan Hai king, xv, 2 v., Tung-hai tchi wai. — The statement is 
an amplification of another entry, kiv. vi, 3, Hai wai nan king, which 
says that this people of black colour live and never die. The Comm. 
says that the shrub of immortality grew on the Yuen-kiu (one of the 
Fairy islands). 

1009) Supra, par. 227. 

10 10) Wu-tchu received in 201 B.C. liis investiture from the Han Em- 
peror who died in 195 b.c. — On Wu-tchu, cf. Szema Tsien, She-ki, 
114, 1 r. — The huh or huk was a measure of three t'ou or pecks. — 
For the event, cf. Liu Hin, Si king tsa ki, of our era ; T.P.Y.L., 
988, 5 r. — On Min-yveh, supra par. 2Ul. 

10)1) Szema Siang-ju, Lo-ho. — E. Bretschneider, Study and Value, p. 
46, — Sugar was known to Pliny only as a medicinal drug. 

1012) Pen tsao king. — T.P. ibid.— On Wu tu, supr. n. 1004. — We 
must also mention i\\e fu-tzG (cf. bish, in Beng. Hind.) or Aconitum 
introduced there at that time. Cf. Fan tze ki jaii : T.P. 990. 1 v. ; 
and note 722 add. 

1018) Nearchos and Megasthenes have spoken of the Sugar-cane of In- 
dia. History speaks of the Ikshvakus, the sons of the Sugar-cane or 
of tlie sweet flag (skr. ikt<hu), one o; whom Ikslnaku Virudhaka 
Ancient king of Potala, was reckoned as an ancestor of Sakyamuni. 
Cf. Rig-Veda, x, 60.— Zimnier, Attindische Leben, p. 130. — J. Eitel, 
Skr. Chin, diet., s.v. 
1014) Dr. C. Thorel, naturalist of the Voyage d' Exploration en Indo- 
Chine, 1866-8, states it most possitively, vol. II, p. 4?8 : '• Nulle part 
nous n'avons trouve la canne-a-suore croissant a I'l'tat spontane en 
Indo-Chine." 



UHIXKSE CIVILISATION. 237 

lOlo) It \v;vs only in 2b2 a.d., tliat some c:ikes nuidc oi Sugur-fiino were 
received from Tangking. and tluit Chinese geographies mention Su- 
gar-cano, there. Cf. Kinny jmto tcliiian; Wu. lull ti li tchi \ Nan 
tchou fi icuh tc/u : Xan faiifi t.i\io inuhtchuany \ T.P.Y.L., 874, 'i-5 r. 

1016) At Ho-vuen. near' Canton. Cf. Wa she pen tsuo\ T.P.Y.L., 
088, 6 r. 

iUl7) Supra, par. L'03. — The pearls of Ceylon were small. Cf. below u. 
1112. 

1018) Where a Market had been e.stiiblished two centuries previously, cf. 
par. 198. 

10.9) Cf. Lieh sieu tch'uan by Liu-Hiang, is.c. 80-9.— T.P.Y.L., 803, G, 

1020) Lull Kia. Han Yueh lieng ki ; Nan fang ts'ao muh tchuany ; W. 
F. Mayers, Hernia and the Jasmine in China: N. and Q., Hongkong, 
1868, ii., 33.— Lah Kia's biography in She Ki. 97, 6-9. 

1021) No explanation had been made yet of Mo-U. 

1022) Cf. with the list of pi'esents sent by the king of Min-yueh in 312 
B.C. Supra, par. 202. 

12l:3) The ronm. explains that on cassia trees one finds some grubs 
huh-tchung (el. 142-1018 — 9589 Bas.) which feed of cassia and are 
not bitter ; soaking them one gets some edible honey, cf. Ku wen 

shih ji sin uien, v, J2 I suspect the ko-tchuiig (10:>77-9589 Bas.) 

of the Yung-tchang trade were the same grubs. 

1024) In Chinese Fung tsiolc, (B-.s 2061-11882}. We may probably 
in Kung find a p onetic ' nita- 'o i of -Vkin, in Sikhin, the Skr. name 
of the bird.— Son^e western p'^oile p " e ited some Kung-tsiok, litt. 
great sparrows, in Tchou Tcheng Wan'y s reign (Tchoa shu). — Koj)- 
hen country produces peacock. [Han sLu). — The South Barbarian 
coun.'y of Tsen (YiMuan fu) produces peacocks {Suh Han Shu) — 
1 le country of Tiao-tc'ii near the Western Ocean produces peacocks 
and lions. (Suh Han Shu; Tchang P'an, Han ki), Cf. T.P.Y.L. 
921, 4-5.— On the introduction of pe cocks from India in Babvlonia, 
cf. the Ja a.:-a Bareni, tr. T. W. R'lys D..vis : B.&O.R., iv. 7-9. 

1025) Peacocks are me itioued in t.ie Eleg'es of Tsri. c. 300 u.c. cf. 
T.P Y.L., 924, ^.— Supra, par. 210. 

1026) Coral was spoken of aid described by Szema Siang-ju, in his 
Shang lin fu, cf. Khang hi tze ti^n, s.v., 96, 5, f. 12 : and T.P., 807, 5. 

-'027) Sa.if'u hwang tu, iv., 6 v. The story says that Tchao-t'o in send- 
ing C em said that they were Fu,ig-ho (i.e. beacon) trees, briglit and 
sh ning even at nigh . — The same ;ext is given in Liu-hin, ,SV King 
tsa ki of our era. ^Ci. T.P.Y.L., 807-4. 

1028) Coral fishery was carried on in the Red Sea in later times to the 
knowledge of the Clr'nese, as shown by the notice of the Siii T\my shu, 
kiv. 221. Cf. F. Hirth, China and Roman Orient, 59. 76, 246. Dr. E. 
Bretschneider, Medla>v.Ees.,\.,\iA, quoting the old Tang shu, kiv. 
258 b, thinks that it refers to the Mediterranean fisheries, but the text 
of the Sill Tai g shu does not permit this interpretation. — The Hou 
l/ai, shu, kiv. 88, and the Wei-liuh. mention coral as a product of Tatsin. 

1029) Cf. .'upra, par. 206.— F. Hirth, China, p. 268-9.- A.de Candolle, 
Origin of Cultivated Plants, \). 138. — Henna in China, by Cantoni- 
ensis, W.F. Mavers, H.T. Hance, E.C. Taintor, Thomas Samp:>on, in 
the N. and Q. of Hong-kong, 1867-68. 

1030) Henna was not brought to the Chinese capital before 111 u.c., i.e. 



238 

after the conquest. Should Tchao-t'o liave had any specimens of it 
about 140 B.C., he would certainly have sent some with the corals. 

1031) Cf. Tuncj rning ki by Kwoli-tze Hen<^, a cnntemporary — T.P.Y. 
L.. 983, 7?'.' 

1032} Cf. Edw. Balfour, Cyclop. Ind., iii., 719, TCo. 

1033) Fo-thi, 4921-7018, or 4924-Cl. 56 Bas.— (P«/w) Feijah or Fat- 
jah is the indigenous name of a part of Sumatra. Cf. R. D. Verbeck, 
Sumatra, aa Geologie elites mines (Vor : Annal. Extrem. Orient., i, 186. 
H. Cordier, Odorle de Fordenone, 1891, [). 1 >4. - A.H. Keane, Ethno- 
log. app. in A.R. Wallace, Australasia, p. 653, gives Fert/ja. The name 
in question is perhaps related to that of the Fasei kingdom, on which 
cf. H. Yule, Mirco Folu, ii., 270-7. 



Chap. VII. —Sixth Period : 221 b.c— a.d. 220. 

Sect. D. b) Changes and Competition in the Sea trade. 
259. A great change occurred about that time with the western Sea 
traders frequenting the Chinese seas. The progressiye advance of the 
Chinese power over the land had gradually driven them away from the 
emporia of their selection. Let us remark that they always chose, for 
their trading stations, places on the sea-coast at proximity of the Chin- 
ese, but not within the Chinese dominion. "What their object was is 
clear enough. They wanted to be enabled to trade easily with the Chin- 
ese centres, without loosing their own independance, and running the risks 
of seizure of their goods or extra mulcts and taxes. At first when the 
Chinese were ettled chiefly around the basin of the Hwang-ho, the 



240 ORIGIN OF THB EARLY 

greater part of the remainder of the country being uncivilised and wild, 
they established their settlements on the South side of the Shantung 
peninsula, in the Gulf ofiKiao-tchou, which they frequented during three 
centuries (c. 675-375 b.c). When the civil wars and the advance o 
the Ts'i-Chinese drove them away from Lang-ya and Tsihnoh, they went 
to Kwei-ki, near pres. Ning-po, and to the entrance of the Islin river, 
near Fuhtchou. The first was given up when the Han Empire extended 
its sway there in 201 b.c, and the second when internecine wars (140- 
110 B.C.) disturbed the country. They shifted their quarters to the An- 
namese coast and the S.W. of Hainan, trading with the Nan-yueh, near 
the present Pakhoi leading to the Heng shan market^o^*. 

260. The Indo-Persians of Hormuz and the Sabseans of the Arabian 
coast, hitherto hand-in-hand, ceased to be alone to share the spoils of the. 
Chinese trade. New competitors had come with the Tatsin traders of the 
Red Sea who had began to appear^oss^ j^^ this juncture the older tra- 
ders established stations and marts at all the points of vantage. The 
emporium of Kattigara was founded on the southern borders of the Nan- 
yueh (in pres. Ha-tinh, S.E,iof Nghe-an province^° ^); and Hwang-tchi 
mariners acquainted with the pearl-fisheries of the Persian gulf and of 
Ceylon, discovered pearls on the W. coast of Hainan and created the 
pearl-fisheries of Tchu-yai, litt. the Coast of Pearls^''^^ (pres. Yai tchou). 
The Chinese conquest of 111 b.c. made amongst others, special districts 
for both ; the latter under the precited name, and the other under that 
of Nhit-nam or South of the San, probably because of its position as the 
southernmost point of their dominion. As in the previous circumstances 
of a similar character the Erythra>ans shifted away once more their cen- 
tral quarters from the Chinese possible supervision. They settled west of 
Cape Cambodia, East side of the gulf of tlve Siam, in Tcham, the Zabai 
of Ptolemy, Tchu-po of the Chinese, and Sajif of the Arabs^^^s^ j^ ^^g 
there that the merchantmen from Oman landed with his companions 
the Hindu Kun-tien who founded the Cambodjan kingdom^'^^^. Known 
to the Chinese as the Funam, or Phnom kingdom it absorbed the old 
Tcham and remained for several centuries the great centre of foreign 
trade east and west^^^o. We cannot therefore be surprised that when 
Alexander trading agent of Maes Titianus went to Kattigara about |00 
A.D., nearly all the geographical names he met with were Hindu 
names^°*^ 

261. Heng shan lemained for centuries the principal market for exotic 
goods imported by foreign merchantmen. ^^^^ \i ^^s situated, east (not 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 5^41 

west) of Nan-ning in S.W. Kwangsi, on the Yli Kiang leading by the 
Pearl river to Canton. The nearest sea shore for lauding goods was near 
the present Pakhoi, and it was there that the merchantmen used to come 
after or not a landing at Nhit-nam (Kattigara). It was called Hop-pu 
or Estuary of Meeting, which hecame the name of the district in 111 d.c. 
These circumstances are interesting to remember, as they explain much 
of subsequent history. Canton did not begin to be an arrival port for 
foreign trade before 159 a.d.,^*^*^ and then only yet as a secondary sta- 
tion, the first being always Nhttnam. 

Notes 

1034) On this important market place of old, cf, par. 261. 

1035) About 140 and 136 b.c. Supra par. 256-7. On Tatsin as Tars- 
hi.sh, cf. t7ifra par. 263. 

1036) At the tmie of the conquest by Tchao-t'o, in 179 B.C. the region 
was still wild nnd not separately mentioned. In 111 i?.c. it became 
Nhit-nam. When after 40 years severance from the Chinese domin- 
ion, 186-226 A.D., the court of Wo at Nanking reestablished Chmese 
authority over the country, and gave fresh administrative denomina- 
tions, that province received the name of Kotik {Kotak, Kiiuduk) which 
shows a close connection with the Hindu name. Cf. Fang yii tchi : 
T.P.Y,L., 172, 11 V. — Hoangviet dia dii chi (Annamese), ii, 31 v. — 
Dr. F. Hir'-h, Zur Geschichte des Antiken Orienthandels, Berlin, 1889, 
p. 19, has justly pointed out the connection of that name with that of 
Kattigara, The notes 329 and 331 must be amended and completed 
by the statements here, as Kesbo-Hanoi was n >t the place. 

1037) The Yen tieh Inn of 86-63 b.c mentions irregular pearls commg 
from there through the Kwei-lin district. Cf. T.P.Y.L., 803, 4 v.— 
In A.D. 87 a pearl of three inches, and in 103, one of five inches came 
through the Yil lin district. Cf. Ku kin tchu by Tsui Pao of 350 
A.D. Cf. T.P.Y.L. 803, 5.— The latter may not have come from the 
Hainan fisheries as the market of Heng shan (cf. par. '261) seems 
to be the place referred to. — Grosier, Chine, \, 201, mentions oyster- 
pearls on the coasts of Hainan. — The Ban shu says that at Tchu-yai, 
the habits and customs were like those of the Hwang-tchz, cf. T.P.Y.L.^ 
785, 2 ?;.— Pparl fisheries stopped since as not productive existed in 
the xvth century on the coasts of the Kwang-tung province, prefec- 
tures of Lien-tchou and Ley-tchou. Cf. Dr. J. Macgowan, Pearls 
and Pearl making : Shanghai almanack, 1 855 ; and W. F. Mayers, 
Ancient Pearl Fisheries in the province of Kwang-tang : N. and G. 
on China and Japan, 1867, i, 1-2.— The Chinese possess particular 
skill in drilling holes into the pearls, (China, Port Catalogues at Ex- 
hibition of Vienna, 1873, p. 427). They may have learned it from 
the Pearl traders of Hormuz who were celebrated for their ability 
under that respect, and to whom Ceylonese pearls were sent for that 
purpose. 

1038) Tchu-po. 4046-4924 Bas„ which was not Burma as unwarrantedly 
stated by some, was a name very little used by the Chinese, because 

that of Fiinam overshadowed it altogether. For the identification of 



242 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

Zaftae with the later S anf &nd their geographical position, cf .H.Yiile, 
Sea-route to China, p. 9 . 

1039) This interesting fact, yet unnoticed, is reported in the Funam 
tu suh tchuan of Kang-tai, 3rd cent. cf. T.P.Y.L., 787,4. — Ku7i- 
Tien represents the two names Kume and Thong of this founder in the 
Chronique des Anciens Rots du Cambodge, trad. et. couim. by E. Ay- 
monnier, in Cochnchine Franqaise, Excursions et Reconnaissances, 
1880, p. 149. 

1040) On the expedition of Kangtai, cf. below par. 2'!i3. 

1041) Quoted in Marinus Tyrius whose work was made use of by Ptole- 
my. Col, H. Yule was the first to notice the fact in his Sources and 
Authorities for India in W. Smith's Atlas of Ancient Geography, 1874, 
p. 22-4 ; Oldest sea-route to China, 1882, p. U. — Dr. Schliehter, The 
African and Asiatic coasts of the Indiaji Ocean in Antiquity, 1891, 
gives no new information on this subject, but he places Kattigara in 
Borneo, overlooking the old Chinese evidence on the subject. 

1042) It is mentioned in these terms by the iV^an s/iein347 a.d. — TheChin- 
ese officials of Kiao-tchou and Jih-nan used to levy from 20 to 30 per 
cent on these goods, and the kings of Tchampa (Lam-ap) were then 
desirous to extend their own frontier north to that market. — M. Archi- 
bald Colquhoun has visited the place m his journey Across Chryse, 1883, 
i, 126 sq. — It was spoken of as an important mart as late as the 12th 
century in the Kwei hat yii heng tchi by Fan shi hu. — Its present name 
fs Hwang or Hung tchou. 

1043) Cf. below § 266. 

262. In 109-108 b.c, corals were brought for sale to the market of 
Heng-shan i^^^^the Ta^.^m men presented a hwa-ti niu (flower-hoof-bull)^'^^5 
and shewed how to make use of the leaves of the il/M/an'"^^(n]agnolia ob- 
ovata, Roxh.) This is apparently the third recorded appearance in China 
seas of the traders from the Ked Sea. There may have been some more 
in the interval, and some traces of them will perhaps be disclosed by fur- 
ther researches. But it is the first time +hat their name appears connected 
with the event in so early a source ; as the authority, so far as their name 
is concerned in the preceding cases, is later in date, and therefore may have 
been completed from some knowledge acquired in later years. 

263. Much has been written about the origin of that name of Tatsin^ 
which became that by which the Roman Empire and specially the Rom- 
an Orient was known to the Chinese, but no satisfactory explanation has 
been given as yet. The ground is clearer now than it was in previous in- 
vestigations on the matter, and much of the dimness has disappeared 
^^''''. Let us remark that tlie name cannot mean Great Ts'in, or Greater 
Ts'm, because there is no Lesser Ts'in, and that Ta great is never used 
by the Chinese in foreign names but for that distinctive purpose ; tliere- 
fore Tats'in must be taken as a whole. When the Symbol Ts'in repre- 
sented the names of the N.W. State of the Chinese agglomeration and 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 243 

of the Empire ia the ord century b.c. it was still read Tan, 7V».Butin 
the firstcentiuy a wave of phonetic cliangesbad come over the land bj the 
supremacy of the Honan dialect for ct)urt dialect by the Han dyuajty, 
and the older sound Ten had become tjen, tsen, tsin. At present il is 

Now recent researches^ '^^^ liave shown that the centre of the Tati'tn 
traders arriviag then into China was the Red sea and that their em- 
porium was Rekem, (later Petra)^*'''^ near the old sea port of Ezionga- 
ber, in the Ailatha gulf, from where Hiram and Salomon, Jehoshaphat 
and Ahaziatf'^^^ with more or less success, had started their Tarshish 
navy. As an emporium it began to grow as an independent state af ;er 
that Tyr had been taken and more or less ruined five times successively, 
by .^.lexander and the Ptolemies (from 332 to 2 87 b.c.) and that some 
of her sea merchants had sought for oiher quarters for their enterprise. 
It continued to develop nothwvthstanding the emporia built by the Ptole- 
mies on the N.W. side of the Red Sea to attract the old Phoenician tra- 
ders and their commerce, and lost its indep«ndance by the hands of t'le 
Romans only in 137 a.d.-'-'^^^^ ii^g sea-going trade ships of Relieia- 
Ailana were Tarshish ships, or ships like those once going to Tarshish, 
and we think that the Chinese Tats'i'n represents simply Tavshisl?-'^'^, 
which they have easily mistaken for a name of country. This solution 
fits well enough with the conclusions arrived at on other grounds. Tl.e 
Tarshish ships that went tn China in 140, 127, 109, 73 b.c.I''^'* were not 
Greek, still less R jman ; they belonged to the independent trade of R(- 
kem-Ailana, plying in concurrence with the Greeks, with all the boldness 
and experience of their elders, the Phoenician Mariners, and their firft 
importation in China was that of Red corals from the Mediterranean (c'. 

264-! Greco-Romans from Egypt were trading with India in the first 
century, but it was by mesaventure that one of them reached Ceylon about 
41 A.D.^''^^, and apparently as a consequence that about i7 a.d., Hippa- 
lus of Alexandria vvas the first Greek navigator who availed himself of 
the monsoon winds^°66^ About 85 A.d., they did not as yet go beyond the 
South of India aecording to the evidence of the Feriplus^'^ ^ L The first 
quarter of the second century saw the Greco-Romans, then masters of 
the Tarshish-Tatsin navy in relation with Sjuih Burmah''^58^ and pro- 
bably not as far east as Kattigara. The latter probability results from 
the report of Alexander trading agent of Maes Titianus, who seems to 
have gone no further than Burma and have heard of the further journey 



244 OUIGIN OP THB KARLT 

from Hindu Mariners. We do not know of any Chinese evidence in fa- 
vour of an arrival of Greco-Romans at that tinae in any part of China. 

265. In 1G6 a.d. the famous Roman mission alleged to have been sent 
by Marcus Aurelius Antoninus {Aii-tU9i in Chinese) was really the first 
direct arrival of Romans in the Flowery Land.^^^^ It has been suggested that 
this was only a private expedition of traders who availed themselves of 
the name of their Emperor as a commendation*°^°. The circumstances 
of the case justify this view. The Parthian war begun in 162 had inter- 
rupted the silk trade which used to be carried inland, and commercial 
interest into a trade producing a profit of ten and hundredfold per cent, 
was a powerful inducement for merchants to make by themselves an attempt 
to open a direct intercourse. The object of the mission required that 
they should be well received, and in ordei to secure the good will of the 
Emperor and officials, according to the long-established practice of forei- 
gners, they oflfered ivory, rhinoceros horns and tortoise shells all articles 
of Annam and neighbouring trade, which they must have procured at Kat- 
tigara, and which we should understand as choiced articles and not as 
staple goods. The result was a beginning and the continuation after- 
wards of an intercourse which recorded in general terms in the Annals, 
is not mentioned again, but in exceptional cases^^''^ For instance in 226 
A.D. a Roman merchant who had come to the court of Wo at Nanking, 
was entrusted with 20 Negrito Pygmie.s^^^^ to biing home with liiru. but 
the scheme fell throujih ; and in 2 84 an important arrival of Roman 
merchants which took place at Canton, offered 30000 rolls of aloes paper 
which j)apcr appears to have been then manufactured in Annam, or 
perhaps in Funam^*^^^^ 

Notes 

1044) Cf. Shuh y ki : T.P.Y.L., 807, 4 v. The text says in Yic-lin 
kiun, where the market was. 

1045) The hwa-ti niu is described as six feet high, swift and powerful, 
with a long wagging tail and four-branched horns. Sent to the capi- 
tal it was employed to draw cart-loads of bronze and stone for the 
Wang sien gallery (then in construction at Tchang-'an) ; the prints 
of its hoofs on the stony-road were like flowers, whence the soubri- 
quet given to it. Cf. the 2'ting mhig ki by Kwoh-tze Heng of our 
era : T.P.Y.L. 900, 1 v. ; 958, 6-7. This text is often corrupted 
in quotations as in the case translated by M. E. H. Parker. China 
Review, xix, 191. 

1046) Tung ming ki, ibid. — The juice was used in dyeing a black colour, 
Cf. Kwoh-Poh. &c. in E. Bretschneider, Bota7i. Sin., ii, 18.— It is 
undoubtedly that use which was shown by the merchants in question. 

1047; In The Chinese name of the Jioman Empire: Acad. Oct. 1, '81: 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 245 

we ^ad suggested that Tatan was for Dadaii a name of Syria. Bnt 
since Tatsin does not appear early enough to have been yet Tatan, and 
that it refers to the upper Red sea and not to Syria, the suggestion 
is untenable. 
10^8") Herewith tlie list of the reading of Ts'iN in the various dialects. 
Pekinese tc/hin, Sliangliai dziny, Ningpo dzing, Wentchon zang, Fut- 
chou chi)ig, Amoy chin ^ Hakka ts'in. Canton ts'un, Koiaean chin, Japa- 
nese shin, Annam ten ; in the dictionaries of M. H. A. Giles and of 
Dr. S. W. Williams. 

1049) By Prof. F. Hirth, in his China and the Roman Orient, frequently 
quoted in our pages. 

1050) Cf. on Petra, Mount Seir, Sinai anp Palestine, 1884, and The 
Eo:k-hewn Capital of Iduma'a, by Prof. Hull : Victoria Institute, 
May 2, 87. 

1051) I, Reg. X, 22.— II, Par. ix, 21 ; xx, 36. 

1052) On the history of Rekem and the facts alluded to here, cf, Era- 
thosthen ap. Strabo, xvi, 4, 2, 21. — Agatharchid. 87.— Diod. Sic, iii, 
42. — Dion. Cafsins. Ixviii, 14. — Ammian. Marcell. xiv, 8, 13. — Also 
E. Bunbury, Hist. Anc. Geogr., i, 647 ; ii, 59, 160, 167, 321. _G 
Rawlinson, Phxnicia, 285-7. 

105o) Ou the meaning of Tarshish ships ; cf. Ign.Guidi, Geographia 
Anttca deir Arabia : Bull. Soc. Geogr. Jtal. 1872. vii, 501 sq.— A. 
H. Sayce, The Races of the Old Test&ment, p. 47. — The Tats'in men 
were tliose who make Tarshish, i.e. who trade on ships like these which 
were going to Tarshish. The Tatj'in men were looked upon as Hai 
lao or sea hunters as showed by a quotation of the Ts'ehfu yiian kwei 
(F. Hirth, O.C. 22). 

1054) Tlie entry of 73 b.c. here rests on a statement of the Liang Shu, 
54, 1, that envoys with presents came to Nhitnam, from Tats'in and 
India during the reign of Han Suan ti, 73-49 B.C. cf. Groeneveldt, 
Malacca, 3. 

1055) Cf. below § 275. 

105G) Cf. Pli7iy, vi, 23 : \Oi—Peripl. 57,— E. Bunbury, Hist. Anc, 
Geogr., ii, 351, 445, 470. 

1057) E. Bunbury, O.C, ii, 472-5. 

1058) Cf. the statement of the jugglers sent by a Shan King in 

120 A.D. 

1059) The Chinese sources are most precise on this point. 

1060) F. Hirth, China and Rowan Orient, 175. 

1061) W.Williams, Middle Kingdom, ii, 409, quoting the Annals of 
Canton says that in the reign of Hwan-ti, 147-168 a.d., Tien-tchu 
(or better Tsen-tuh j, Tatsin and other nations came by sea with tri- 
bute, and from this time trade was carried on at Canton wieh fore- 
igners. 

1062) Negrito-Pygmies were paat of the native population of China, and 
were known since the days of Yao. Cf. T. de L., The Negrito-Pyg- 
mies of Ancient China : B.&O.R., v, 169, 203, sq. 

1063) Cf. Ling piao luh yh ; Nan yueh tchii T.P.Y.L., 982, 4.— The 
first work mentions the fabrication of aloes paper. 



246 ORIGIN OP THK EARLY 

266. After the conquest of Nan-yueli the Chinese Emperor Han Wu- 

ti established in the Imperial park of the capital ( Yil siiih yuen at Tchang- 

'an) the Fu-ti gardens, where a large number of trees and plants were 

brought from the New provinces. In the following list which has been 

preserved in a description of the Metropole,^^^ ^ tliirteen names are given 

with the number of roots in each case: tiKang pu, or sweet flag, Acorus 

calamus ; — Shan Kiang, or Indian shot, Canna indica ; — Kan-tsiao or 

Banana tree ; — Liu-kiu tze or Quisqualis indica ; — Kwei, or Cinnnamon 

Cassia : — Mih hiang or Agila wood ; — Tchi-Kiah hwa, or Finger-nail 

flower, Henna; — Lung-yen, or Nephelium longan ; — Li-tchi, or Nephel- 

mm Litchi ; — Pin-lang, or Areca Catechu ; — Kan-Ian, or Canarium ; — 

Tsien-sing tze, or Thousand years ; — and the Kan-yii, or Sweet Orange 

tree. I*' ^^ We are told that notwithstanding fresh plants sent again from 

Kiao-tchi, the plantations could not be kept up, and that most of them 

became dry and died. 

Besides its botanical interest, the above list discloses old foreign im- 
portations in Nan-yueh in addition to thise we have noticed. The Tch'ang- 
^,^iOG6 m^^ Kan-tsias^^^'^ denote by their names that they were introduced 
by the traders of India ; the shan-kiang and the hu-kiu tze were likewise 
imported from the Indian continent. i''^^ 

267, Soon afterwards we hear again that the Hwang-tcin (of Hormuzia) 
whose country lay at 30000 li from Hop-pu and Nhitnam, presented a 
large quantity of bright pearls^^^^, some coloured glass^*^'"^, curious stones 
and strange objects, such as a large round pearl, perfectly sphericaU^^^ . 
The coloured glass which appears here for the first time, was then man- 
ufactured in Kabulistan, which is we have had already occasion to notice 
had frequent relations with Hormuzia. Han Wu Ti was so pleased 
with tlie glass that he wanted some more and sent a special envoy by 
sea to purchase a quantity of the article. The name of the emporium 
which the envoy must have visited is not recorded, bat we may assume 
that it was Zabai^^T^, Jq ^^^^ 2, some Hwang-tchis presented living 
rhinoceroses ^^''^. 

268. The name of Hwang-tclii, in its acceptation of yellow fingers for 
the West-Orientals wlio used to dye their fingers with Henna, M'as then 
too vague a term, as several races of yellow fingers were then trading 
with China by sea. It became necessary to distinguish among them and 
several names began then to appear. 

Commercial missions from Tzen-tu, commonly T'ien-tchu^*^^*, for Sin- 
du or India, are said to have arrived in China after 73 u.c. by the port 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 247 

of Nliituaai^'^''' (or Kattigara) and after 89 a.i>. ■'^"'^° ; agaui in 159 a. d 
by Nhitnam and Canton ^'^"'^. It was the first arrival in the latter place 
iti78_ These dates are not witliMut interest as it is in 75 J!.c. that the 
Kalingas, the famous sea-traders of India S.E. are reputed to have es- 
tablished settlements in Java^*^"9. And during tlie last portion of the 
2nd century, the King of Saurashtra Mandala was sending ships with 
cargoes to Mahacina, Cina and Bhota**'*'. It is most interesting to find 
another name of ships arriving in China was that of Oman, a maritime 
state, consisting almost chiefly of ships, in the Sea of Persia, iJOOOO // 
distant. They frequented the ports of Funam, and thoy imjjorted into 
China ebony wood^""'. 

Notes 

10G4) San fu hwaiuj-tu of c. 200 a.d., ed. 1784, kiv. iii,. fol. 8. — Ten 
Shan kiang^ twelve Kan-tsiao, ten Liu-hiu t:<\ and a hundred of each 
of the others, save the Mih-liiang, of which the jiuuiber is not given. 
— Cf. supra, note 989, on a former collection made by Han \Vu ti. 

1065) For these identifications, cf. E. J3retschneider, Stud// and Value, 
pass., and Botanicum Siniciim, vol. I. — On Kan-tsiao and its probable 
Sanskrit etymology, cf. my note On Eastern names of the Banana : 
B. & O.R., Jitly," 1890, p. 17G. 

1006) Cf. TcKang pu from Tamil vAssanibu, Maylayal, ya,shai)tbu. It is 
said to be not indigenous in India, but an importation from northern 
lands. Cf. Edward Balfour, Cyclo/K liid. sub verb. This etymology 
and the intro luctiou of the plant about that time dispose of the render- 
ing of Tso tchuen, V., xxx., 7 in J. Legge, Chin. Class., v., 217, and 
of the assimilations of native scholars in E. Bretschneidcr, Botan. Sin- 
ic, ii., 376. 

10t')7) Kan-siao, auc. K an t ha , from Sanskr. K adal a . was known by 
Szema Siang-ju, i.e., prior to 126 n.c, in S. Szetchuen, cf. below, par. 

10G8) Hanshii: T.P.Y.L., 785, 2 r. 

1069) Ming //ueh, of the Persian gulf, cf. par. 203, 253, note 771. 

1070) Coloured glass, liu-li for pih-ltu-li ; of. Hind, halur, Arab, ballur, 
&c. T. de L., On the Aiicient htstor-i/ of glass and coal in Chtna : 
T'oung Pao, 1^91 ; F. Hirth, China,' 228-232.— It was known as a 
product of Ke-pin in the reports on that country, Tsien Han Shu, 96: 
A. Wylie, Western Regions, 16. And it Avas from there that the 
travelling merchants came who taught the process in China about -135 
a.d. 

1071) The text says that this pearl was so perfectly round, that once 
placed on a plain surface, it could not be still for a whole day. 

1072} Han sha ; Ti li tchi.— T.P. 80 -, 3 v.— And suj>ra 2GU. ' 

1073) Hou Han shu, 116. — Thev used also to import shui-ts n(/ or Rock 
Crystal. Cf.T.P.Y.L., 820, 'g. 

1074) Tien-tchu is a misreading of modern Scholars. Tien, h o a v c n 
was Tsen during the Han dvnastv. It is rightlv given in Giles' Die- 
tionary p.xv as the probable readirg about lOO r-.c. when the Chinese 
Princess sent as a wife to the Ivun-mi of the Wusuns wiio introduced 
the pi -pa in China was lamenting her unhapjiy fate in a song which 



has been preserver) to the present clay. 
1075^ Liang shu, 54, 1. Cf. supra note 912 on an introduction of Bud- 
dhist Books in 2 i?.c. ; and par. 233. 

1076) Hou Han shu. — Pauthier, Exame >. Methodique, p. 26 G, — Tln' 
place of arrival in tliis case is not mentioned. It may have been 
inland. 

1077) An Shi-kao, a Buddhist Missionary from Parthia who had arrived 
in China bv the N'"rth in 149 a.d.. went before 170 a.d. to Canton to 
see other Missionaries, but he was killed there by the people. Cf. S. 
Beal, Buddhist Literature, 7 ; Bunyu N.i 'jio, Tripitaka. 381. 

1078) Hon Han shu: Hiian- ti tchuan. — W. Williams, Middl King- 
dom, ii, 409. — Subsequent arrivals are noticed in 357, 428, 477, 502, 
50t, 507, 508, 515, 571, 641, &c. The gap between 159 and 357 is 
rather remarkable. 

1079) Cf. Ed. Balfour, Cyclop. Ind., ii, 481 . 

1080; Cf. A. Weber, Ueber das ^atrunjaya Mahatmj/am ; Abh. D.M.G. 

1858, i, 4, p. 43 ; U. Redatsek, Emporia, p. 111. 
1081) Modern 0-wen, crow-ornament. -Cf. Ts'ui Pao, Ku kin tchu. — 

Rang-tai, Funam tu suh tchuan. — T.P.Y.L. 961, 9 v. ; 787, 4. 



Chap. VII— Sixth Pkuiod : 2l>1 b.c— a.d. 220. 
Sect. D. c) South- West. 

269. Tlie report of Tchangkien in 126 B.C. on his first mission in 
Turkestan gave to Han Wii-ti a high opinion of the wealtli of Bactria, 
Parthia, and Ferghana,^ ^'^'^ and "the importance of securing their attach- 
ment to the Middle Kingdom, whose territojy would thus be expanded 
10,000 U, embracing people of every custom, and requiring a nine-fold 
staff of interpreters ; while the prestige of the Empire would be all-per- 
vading from sea to sea."^'^'^ It showed moreover that tlie route by tlie 
Kiang, or border tribes of Tibet, being dangerous because of their enmity, 
and the North route cut by the Hinngnus, it would be safer to start 
through Szetchuen and India to reach Bactria, since goods from Sliuh 
arrived there in that direction. The Etnperor was transported with delight, 
and after several unsuccessful missions in four directions, acting on their 
reports, he sent Tchang-kien himself in 122 to open the route through 
the Kingdom of Tsen in Yunnan.' ' 84 "pj^y haughtv answer and refusal 
of the latter's king stopped for a time Chinese enterprise towards the 
South West. After the conquest of tlie Non-yueh, fresh attempts weie 
made, and the Tsen kingdom acknowledged the Chinese suzerainty, but 
any route further in the S.W. towards India remained impassable through 
the Kunmings or Kunmis occupying the West of Yunnan. We have 
alluded to these various events in previous pages.'"^^* 

270, Tlie Kun-mings who thus occupied such an important position 
with reference to intercommunications with the South-West, deserve a 
special notice. They became the chief population in the west portion of the 



$50 01!I(!1K OP THE EARLY 

Tesn Kingdom of Yunnan fu wliose king had been compelled to come to 
terms witli tliem.^ ^'^ TIkv \M'ie immigra-Uts from the North who had 
•come to settle there in the first quarter of the 2nd century b.c. They had 
'.separated from the main body of the VVusuns or Kunmis people, a fair 
W[>haired and blue eyed race, when the latter were driven away from their 
quarters near Tun-hwang (in IST.W. Kansuh) by tho Yueh-ti, and fled 
southwards,^''^'' while the main body went N.\Y. of the Hiungnus.'^^s 
We shall hear again df this red haired people in a curious circumstance 
hitherto unintelligible (see below 278). 

271. The policy of the Chinese government, which had extended its 
dominion in Szetchuen West and South-East since 130 B.C., was to ad- 
vance towards the South-W(st in every available occasion^*^^*. In 111 
B.C. a serious progress was made towards the South and West, and four 
new administrative districts were created, all about the limits of present 
Szetchuen province, as the commencement of a conterminous chain, inten- 
ded to extend onward to Bactria^-^^^. AHliough precarious and temporary 
as shown by subsequent history, this authority was all that was possible 
for the tune being. The successful conquest of Nan-yueh, in that same 
year permitted a farther advance. The King of Tsen in 110 B.C. was 
induced to received investiture froia the Chinese Emperor, whose suzer- 
ainty the year after was recognized by the Eed-haired Kun-mis. " After 
this envoys were again sent, but to the end they never succeeded in 
opening up a passage-"^^^"' 

272. The military expedition of the Tsen kingdom towards Old Pagan 
on the Iwawaddy about 280 B.C., had undoubtedly facilitated commercial 
intercourse with the Hindu mercantile colonies of Pegu. It was through 
this route that had come the bearded travelling merchant, who before 
the foundation of the Empire^*^^-, arrived in S,W. Hunan carrying some 
valuable spices snch as ngai-nap or mint-palm ?, and mi-sung, a sort of 
l^arcotic^'^''^. When Sema-Siang-ju, about 130 was superintending Chin- 
ese affairs in the South-West of present Szetdiuen, he became acquainted 
with CO CO a-n ut s, (imported by traders), and made them known to his 
■countrymen ^"^'. 

i73. Some Indian paper seems to have been carried over to China 
tliruiigh that route, before 12 B.C. We know from Nearchus that Hindus 
used some c o 1 1 o n w e 1 1 beaten t o ge t h e r to write upon^^^^^ Now 
the liograpliy of Tchao Hwang-hou, Empres.s of Han Hao Tcheng-Ti, 
says^^^'' that i\\e had some paper called hak-tai, (a foreign name vari- 
ously ^^ri1ten) which is described as a sort of small paper made of spread 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 251 

a n d p o 11 u de d g ra s s-fi b r e s. The description is therfforo similar 
to tliat of Nearchus. In the absence of cotton a similar ariirle was imi- 
tated iu China with aiii or silk rofuse^^^", but this was only an inter- 
mediary btage and in 105 n.c. the Marquess Tsai-lun started the manu- 
facture of papers made of Broussonetia papyri/era, and of lags^'^^'*. 

27i. Han Suau-ti, who reigned in 73-49 u.c, is reported to have re- 
ceiveil from India, a precious mirror, large as a coin of the 8 tchu type^^^^, 
■and fixed into a box made of Amber. The jewel in que^ticn liad been 
brought by a route passing through the district of Fan-kiun (pres. Sin 
Fan, S.E. of Tcheng-tu). It was lost or stolen at the death of the Em- 
peror^i'^^. These minutia; of history in the absence of general statements 
.are interesting because of the information, otherwise unknown, which they 
procure on Ancient intercourse. 

Many other articles will have to be added to the hst of that trade with 
the progress of research, as it could not fail to have liad some importance. 
Certain political events which occurred m the first century appear to have 
been caused by the desire of cutting this profitable route. .jouth of the 
State of TsEN, some native tribes happened to settle on the tract of this 
commercial route, and derived advantage h'oni the merchants in levying 
taxes on their goods. 

275. Singlialese traders, i^*^^ finding probably that the overcharges made 
that route t(jo expensive, and desirous to avoid them, took a more western 
route sometime about the Christian era. Starting from Hippuri (of Pliny, 
in Taprobane^-''^), N.E. along tlie Indian coast, up to Desarene or Orissa, 
they struck across the bay to Sada in Argyre or Arakan,^^*^"^ then by the 
long famed Aeng pass, the Ira wad y and Shweli rivers, eastwards across 
the Lu-kiang or Salwcn river, they arrived on the banks of the Lan-tsan 
kiang or Upper Mekong river, where the barter took place.^-^- Pliny 
tells us that the Singhalese Rachias, who about 47 a.d., had been sent ou 
embassy to Rome, after the journey by sea misadventure of a Roman 
agent of Anniu;5 Plocanius to Ceylon, said that his father used to go and 
trade, on the banks of a river, beyond the Hemodii mountains (i.e. the - 
Himalayas, and here their spurs the Burmese yjDuia) with tlie SEUESjnen • 
of high stature with red hair and blue eyes.31^'' ,, In them we can easily -^ 
recognize the Red-haired Kun-mis. Subjects of the Chinese Empire 
since 108 bc„ they could boast of being themselves Seres, the name by 
which they had known the Chinese since the time of their Northern hab- 
itat. We find thus explained the two difficulties hitherto unsolved about 
red-haired Cliinese, and the northern name of Seres which occurred in the 



2 52 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

South on that single occasion.' i''*' 

276. The Singhalese trade by the western route we have just described 
was undoubtedly successful, and detrimental to the former route more 
south, as it soon raised the envy of the ^Ai-lan tribes. In 69 a.d. some 
of them advanced as far as Yao (in pres. Tsu-hiung, Yunnan E.) head 
station of the west route, which they occupied, thus cutting off any out- 
side coinmnnication with the Kun-mis otherwise than through them, and 
tendered tlieir submission to the Chinese Empire. The event was hailed 
with the greatest satisfaction by the Chinese, and a new government called 
Ytmg-tchang, or Ever-prosperous, was intended to be the head-land of 
all South-west intercourse. It extended from the west of the present 
Tsu-hiung-fu to the banks of the Lan-tsang kiang, and Northwards over 
the present territories of Ta-li and Li-kiang between the pre-cited river 
and the Kin-sha kiang. Eight years later (i.e. 77 a.d.) an insurrection 
which arose among the Ai-lao was quelled by the Kun-mis on behalf of 
the Chinese government. The country was in a frequent state of quasi 
rebellion, and the authority of the Han dynasty was well respected there- 
but by frequent interference of military forces. 

277. The Yung-tchang trade was looked upon with great interest, and 
not a few allusions were made to it in the historical literature. Some lists 
of the staple articles of that trade have been preserved. In the Annals 
of the Eastern Han dynasty,'!'^^ at the opening in 69 a.d., it consisted 
of copper, iron, lead, tin,"-^^ gold and silver,'^'^ of bright pearls, ^^'^ 
amber,^^!^ crystal, vitreous ware, ^^^^ Ko-tchung grubs, "^^ oyster-pearls,, 
peacocks, kingfishers, rhinoceros, elephants, apes, and tapirs, all products 
from Shan-Burma, Malacca, Ceylon, India, Kabulistan, &c,, but not as 
yet from the Red Sea. 

Some time afterwards the Ktu-yuen^^^* used to arrive once a year at 
ih«i Yung-tchang mart, with tin, iron, cliicken tongues'i-^'', parrots of red, 
white and other colours, according to a notice uf the same dateii^^. A 
later document enumerates the goods which used to bo carried from the 
country of the Kun-lun^^^^, 81 days journey from the Si-er-ho (an afflu- 
ent of the Lan-t>ang Kiang near Ta-li fu), as elephants, fragrant tsing- 
muh (aristolochia), fragrant sandal wood {tchan-tan), fragrant red sandal, 
pin-Iang (Arecn Catechu'), vitreous ware, crystal, li-pei or shell-cups and 
rhinoceros-horns : i^o^ 

In the year 97 a.d., a Shan king, Yung-yu tiao entered into rela- 
tions with China, and in 120, conjurors presented by him to the Emperor 
.said that they were Tatsin men, communications existing then with Tat- 



I 



CHIN'ESK CM IM-JATloN. 2)3 

ill bv tlie Soiitli-'.vist of ilie Shan stiites^'-'. 

L'78. "We owe m >rc' tli.tii a passing- refereix-e tc tlic C I o c c, iu Cliiu- 
ose Ki-sliet. <>[■ cliickeu-tongae which was for the first time spoken of atthe 
court of IIax H\viin-ti (It7-IG7 .v.d.) as a wonderful product of nature, 
according to Yng-sliao, a scholar of some emincucc for that tiiiie-'---. It 
was then a novelty. In the we^t at the time of the Peri[>lus of tlie Ery- 
tlira-an Sea (c. 6o-75 a.o.) it was still unknown, and Pliny (d. 79 a.d.) 
in his d''seri|)tioii from hear-sav does not distiniiuish it froui its con- 
gener the nutmeg. The sum[itniiry laws of 176-180 show that it was 
then well known. The Chinese heard from the Report of Kang-hai 
wlio liad heen sent on a scientific mission to Ciindx.dja (230-34:0 a.d.) that 
the ch'cken-t ongiie fragrant were imported from the Ma-ngv. tcliou^^'-^ 
or live islands J/rr, i.e. the Moluccas^--', east of .Ta\;i, which is an ac- 
curate fact, as the Hv(! islets west of Gilolo are the original Mulnkus huH 
the native country of the Clove. It is rather curious that this spice 
should not have lieen introduced in China hy the Southern Coasts and 
should have lirst reachcil ihe Middle IvMigdom hy the Shan-Bui'mese 
Route. 

27i). An event of no mean importance for the introduction of western 
notions in China was the arrival, ahout 72 A.D.^"-^, of seventy families 
of Jews who settled hetween LU shan (Ya-tchou fu, Szetchueii W.) 
and Tcheng-tu. One of their inscrijnions at Kai-feng fu tells us that 
they came from ImliaJ'^-'', i.e. through India hy the trade route from 
Bactria to Szetcliuen. Only five families, still preserving their Jewish 
features, have survived to the present dav, hut their old faith has arone 
^1"-''. The inriueiue of the.-e o or 400 ]ieo]ilc of an energetic and insinu- 
ating race must have heen much more important than it has heen cus- 
tomary to suppose. They were doubtlessly full of their own lore and of 
tlie notions of western cirilisation of the time, which they cannot helj 
having spread around them^^^s^ 

Xi'TKS 

1082) I thus write f(n' co ivcniciice the Chinese Ta-Ji/a, Ansi/i, and Tdi/Kciii. 

1083) Such are tlie exact terms of Tchang kien's report in Szeuia Xsien. 
Shi' li, 12:!, dr. It Mas therefore an idea of conquest which was pro- 
minent at first in the Chinese mind. — All these details and the follow- 
ing fire ai^cn in the bioirraidiv of Tchana-kien bv Szema Tsicn. 

1084) Cf. Ja till Ti W((ii(i riien pvio. 

1085) On these various circiims'ance.s, cf. sitpr., p. 60-63 ; but the date 
of 123 for the return of 'i'chang kien must he corrected into 12G, and 
hi-; own mission in 122 added to the recit. — Envoys t<j the South were 
severally feent on two ocea-ioiis, 13(!-122 and 111 b.i'. — tf. also mv 




J 25 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

arfioles. 'I'in-iji'it not fiiili(( : Acad. ]May 2, and Imlin from China, 
ibid. Sei)t. 0,' 1885. 
l()8Gj The Cliinesft wen^ still in ii^noranoe t.liat routes tlirongli Yunnan 
were too meridional and did not l(>ad to India but to Indu-China, 

1087) In tlie Tang filvi. their northern origin is fully stated, as well as 
their original friendship with tlie Hiungnus. Cf. T.P.Y.L., 791 , 12. 
-—This gives a contenanee to the traiiitional claim of tlie Karengs of 
Burma, that they came originally from the North, l)eyond the Flowing 
Sands, and after a stay near the present Ya tchou, Szetcliuen W. came 
south and settled near Taungu. Cf. MacMahon, The Karens. 113 ; 
Spearman, British Burma Gazetteer, i, 163 ; T. de L., Languages of 
China before the Chinese, 147-8. 

1088) Cf. Tsien Han shu, Ixi, Biography of Tchang kien ; A. Wylie, 
Western Regions, 4'. — In -.70 b.c. the Shen-yu of the Hiungnus said 
in liis despatch to the Chinese Emperorthat Lowlan (Lahran), Wusun, 
and other states had submitted to liini. Cf. Tsien Han Shu, kiv. 1)4; 
A, Wylie, Heungnoo, 415. 

1089) It was in that year tiiat the administrative provinces of Kien-wei 
and Ya-'-Iang in the S.E., and of Kiung and Tfok on the borders West 
had been established. — Szenia-siang ju was tlie statesman who acted 
in the circumstance, and we know that lie was interes ed in western 
pr<)ducts. — On trad' of native articles by the traders of Shuh, cf. 
Szema Tsien, She ki, 11 G, 2-3. 

1090) Cf. Li tai Ti Wang nien piao. — The underlined sentence comes 
from the Tsen Han shu, kiv. Ixi : A. Wvlie, Western Regions, 51. 

1091 ) Cf. Tsien Han shu, ibid. 

1092) CL supra p. 56 : note 282 must therefore be completed the pre- 
sent information. 

10'.)3) Ngai-na]), 8818-7759 Bas., unidentified, l)ut said to come througli 
Piao ov Pegu, Ni-sung, 11038-11048 Bas., also unidentified and said 
to come from tlie Western Ocean. Cf. T.P.Y.L. 982, 3 v., (5-7.— 
In tlie notice of Tatsin in tlie Wei-Iioh, these two spices are mentioned; 
unhappily in the text reprinted in Dr. Hirtli, China and the Roman 
Orient, ]). Il3, they appear as mi-mi-ton-nah, instead of mi-sung, 
ngai-nah. 

1194) Cf. T. de L.. Le Coco du Rot de Vueh (Oriental Congress of 
1892) p. 903. On Szema-Siang-ju, cf. note 1089.- These articles as 
shown by their Chinese names did not come there by the Annam route. 
Cf. note 1\)47. 

1095) Cf. Strabo, xv, 67. — Also, Max IMiiller, On the introduction of 
icriting m India : Hist. Anc. Sanskr. Tiit., 1859, p. 515. 

1096) Tsien Han shu. kiv. 97 (2)._C(mim. of Yng-Shao, 2nd cent.— 
Hak-tin, mod. heh-ti, 10549 or 12719-10740 Bas., might be compared 
to the skr. aktu. 

1097) Cf. llii^hen, Shwoh v^jr/??. in 89- 99 a.i>. 

109?) Cf. F. Hirth, Die Erjindung des Papiers in China, p. 1-14; 

T'oung Pao Archives, i, 1890. — J. Edkins, On the Origin of paper 

making in China : N. and Q., Hongkong, 1867, i, 67-8. — G. Pau- 

thier, Memoires xur /' Antupiitc, ii, 395-4<i4. 
1099) The coins weiiihing 8 tchu were issued for the first time in 183 

B.C. cf. my Chinese Coins, Early period, p. 342. 



CHINRSE CIVlLli^ATIOX. 255 

1 ]0<^) Cf. Si King tsa hi, a RecorJ ot" iiieideiits at Tcli'ang-an, hv Lin- 
liiii.uf our eni.-T.P.V.L., 717, 4 r. and 80S, 1 /'. 

1101) Tlie navy omjiloy 'd iii that trade was probably tliat of the 
Kah'nyai^. 

1102) Iilcntitiod with a port called A'lulrcmdh', the name of wliicli has the 
same meaning, i.e. /torxc-tai'lft, in Sanskrit. 

1 103j Cf. H. Yule, Xote'i on the oldest Jiecords of the Sea-route to China, 
p. 1-5, and following- note 

1 104) It is rather remarkable that bore wp find again the old trade route 
followed by commercial missions since those of Shou-mi and Nele (p. 
38-40 an I n. 1 OG) at the time of Tch.'U 'Iclieng Wang about 1079 
15. c. anil later. Eastwards of the Mekong it passed through Ta-yao 
or Yao district, which was occupied by the Ai-lao when they M'anted 
to cut off the Sirghalese trade, as shown par. 'll^o. Cf. also note 196. 

llOo) Cf. PHny, vi:, 2.': 84, 8(5, 88, 89, 91._Periplus, GO. — Reinaud, 
L Empire Jiomai/t et VAsie Orient<ih\ p. ;)2,5. — J. Edkins, Allusions to 
China in Plinifs Natural Histortj, Peking. 1885, p. 10-1-.— E. Re- 
hatsek, Emporia, 119, 

1 l(t6) Ptolemy's statements represent the Chinese as Seres, when readied 
by the long land route through Central Asia, and as Sinae, when 
reached by the sea-voyages. Cf H. Yule. Notes, p. 2. The circum- 
stance of the fair-haired Kunmis, Chinese*subjects, and intermediaries, 
explains the difficultv in Pliny's text. 

1107) Cf. Iloulfanshn, kiv. llG.—Tanr/shu.—T.F.Y.L,, 786,2. 

1108) On the Ai-lao, cf. Hou Han shu, kiv. 116. — And on the legends 
of their origin, G. Deveria, La Frontiere Siiio-Amianiite, 1886, p. 
117, sq. — T. de L., The Languages of China be/ore the Chinese, 1886, 
par. 99-102; edit, frangaise, 1888, suppl, p. 153. 

1109) 'Ihe T.P.Y.L., 786, 2, quotes the same list from the Kiutchou hi 
of Ho-yen, 3rd cent. 

lUO) The great beds of tin ore of Malacca were probably not yet worked 
out, as we hear nothing about them. Kang-tai, in Cambodja, c. 240, 
A.D., heard of a Peh-lu district. South-east of Tchu-po or Java, pro- 
ducing tin, which was resold outside the country. Cf. T.P.Y.L., 786. 
'dv. As there is notin-pmducing land S.E. of Java, and since the tin 
districts extend from Tavoy to BiUiton, the statement shows that Peh- 
lii w;is heard of in Java by sea-traders travelling along the west coasts 
of Sumatra and eastwards to Java, properly the extreme east of Java; 
Peh-lu or Pak-lu could hardly be Perak, (whose tin has long been 
worked) because it is too far in the Malacca Straits, but it could be 
Junk-Ceylon or another of the Mergui islands. 

nil) Extensive mines of silver exist on the East of the Irawaddy from 
the X.E. of Mandalay to the South of Yunnan. - Wan Tchen of the 
3rd cent, in his Nan tchou y tviih tchi, says that the Kin-lin country, 
2000 li from Funam (Cambodja) produces silver ; the })eoi)le there are 
fond of hunting, and ride on large elephants. Now Kin-lin was Kam- 
lun, i.e. the Kanran, natives (^f Burma, who first settled near Pronie. 
Cf. T.P.Y.L., 790, 9r, and 712, 5.— Spearman. British Burma, \., 238. 
- Ancient silver mines are said to have been found in the isle of Banca. 

llli) Kwang-tchu, i.e. bright pearls, of Ceylon, different in name from 
the Ming-gwet pearls o( the Persian Gulf (cf. par. 103, note 771 supra). 



256 OKIGiy OF TUB EAULY 

Tlie jiaiu/-tcltii, or oyster iicarl.-, ul-^o from Coylon. — Small fine pearls- 
only were i^enerally found tiiere, the big ones occasionally found were 
bad. Cf. McrrcilJes de VInde, edit. Van der Litli et Devic, p. 179-180. 
— Tlie J-'eripliis mentions the pearl fishery, and the inannfacture of 
stuffs ornamented with small seed pearls. Cf. Ptolemy, vii., 1. 10. — 
E. Bnnbury, Atic. Geogr., ii., 473. On the pearl-fishery of Ceylon, 
cf. Vincent, Commerce and Narigation of the tAncients, ii., 489-490. 
— E. Tonnent, Ce>//ou, ii., 561.— II, Yule, Jkcrca FoIo,u., 321, 859- 
oG). — Cf, also on the better quabty of tlie Pearls of the Persian Gulf. 
E. Reclus, Asie Anterieure, 861. 
111;>) \ml>L!r ; we have already heard of it. Supra. § ;^'48, note 99S. 

1114) On //«-//, or vitreous ware, supra note 1070. 

1115) On Ko-tchung (grubs) supra note 1023. 

IIIG) Kia-i/nen, 7:^72-1064 Bas. The archaic dialects in Giles' Diet, do 

not suggest any seiious change in the.^e sounds. 
11)7) Cliicken-tongues, ICi-shi'f, ov cloves, infra 278. 

1118) IVu shi wed kwoh tclnian : T.I'. 790, 10. 

1119) Name of the Kokarit hills. Dana mountains and Poung-loung 
range, east ()f Teiinasserim and Pegu. Cf. T. de L , Formosa notes' 
par. 38. — The name has misled several scholars because of its similar- 
itv with the Kun-lun range of North Tibet. 

1120) Nan y tclii. — WV.Y A.. .789. Sand 982,2 r. 

11.' 1) Iloti ilan shi(, 116.— TJW.L., 791, S r.— Cf. supra note 282. 

1122) Yng-Shan, autlior of the celebrated antiquarium treatise entitled 
J-Vug siih tnng, in bis Hdii-kican-//. Cf. T.P.Y. L., 9S1, 6 r. 

1123) Fii-van tu suJi tchnen : T.P.. 7f^7, 3 /•. — Wn shi icai Kwoh 
tchuen. — Nun tchuu // icuh tclti. — According to the Tsien yh hi t^^tev. 
an old western foreigner of an outer country explained that it comes 
fioni a tree of which the fiuwers become the chicken-tongues. — Cf. 
T. P.. 981, (;-7. — Kang-tai had understood tliat they were small fruits, 
but the cloves are not the fruits, but the unexpaiKled flower-liuds, and 
therefore the old f'^rei^ner was right. 

1124 j It is not impossible that the combination Ma-ngu, was an aiteni[)t 
at an imitation of Mahika. the name of the islands, while showing 
that tiiey were five. — The proper Moluccas are the five islets on the west 
side of the lartie island of Gilolo: thev constitute the native country of 
the ell 've, and are the celebrated islands which mainly promptel the 
European nations of the 1 otli century to the discovery of the new world, 
and of a navigation which made known to them a portion of the old 
one, equal to the new in extent. Cf. J. Crawfurd, Descript. Diet. 
Indian islands, p. 283. — In the 7th cent., the Moluccas are mentioned 
in Chinese descriptions as Mi-li-lii'i, but it is not said that their sliips 
were then going there as they did under the Ming dynasty. Cf. W. 
P. Groeneveldt, Mala// Archipelago, p. 58, 117. 

1125) The date is generally state 1 to be the Han period, reii;'n of Ming- 
ti, 58-76 A.D. ; but the year 72 was indicated by the first desuists who 
came in contact with them. It is not however well ascertained, and 
nifiy have been some years earlier. 

1126) Inscription of 1488. Cf. A. K. Glover. The Tahh-t Iiisrriptiu is 
of thi' Chine-<e Jews discovered at Kai-fung fa in 1 '5 ) : 1!. iV ().Ii. v.. 
2;>0. — In face of this positive statement it is curious to reaii in (ir.'sicr. 
('■'line, 1S19, iv.. 4',U). I'e-uining the reports of ^Missionaries : '•11 iar„it 



CHlNNSli ClVIMSATIuN. 257 

par lout ee qu'on a pii tiror d'oux, que co pays d'Occiclent (Si-i/u d'ou 
ils sont veiuis) est, la Perse, ct qu'il viiirpiit par le Khorassan et Sam- 
arkand ; ils conservent ineme encore dans leur langue plnsienrs mots 
persans." 

1127) A recent traveller, M. Arnand, at Kaifuug fii, where they settled 
since 1163 a.d. gives this information and says that on the site of their 
ancient temple, an inscription has been set up with the dates of con- 
struction and destruction. 

11-! i; In my notice On the Entrance of the Jews into China during the 
first centurji of our era (B. & O. R. v., 131-4), I have expressed my 
opinion that these Jews must liave branched off from those settled in 
Babylon, Seleucia, and Ctesiphon, when the persecution which followed 
the mismanagement of their countrymen Asinai and Alinai compelled 
them to remove. — Cf. also H. Cordier, Les Juifs en CAm^' (L'Anthrop- 
ologie, 1390, p. 54.7-Dl. 







CHINESE CIVILISATION. 



259 



Sect. D. — Foreiffn and Chinese Tradimj Navies. 



280. We have noticed in previous pages/i-^ that after some event which 
the vagueness and fabled character of the recit does not permit to 
ascertain, the Indo-Persian mariners had been compelled to shift their 
sea-route and give up passing through the Malacca Straits. ^i^o The 
Sunda Straits being still unopened, ^i^i tJ^ey passed through some of 
the straits further east. The circumstance deserves some attention as 
it explains several historical problems. It permits us to understand 
how Ptolemy was misled in the extraordinary length he gave to the 
Malacca peninsula, and how it was he knew nothing of the Malacca 
Straits. It explains also how it happened that the Hindu colonists in 
Java settled at the farther east of the island instead of any nearer 
spot. It led to the discovery of clove and nutmeg, natives of the 
Moluccas and Banda Islands respectively. We know that the Indo- 
Persian mariners were passing through there and northwards in the 
second century B.C. as shown by their stories of Fire Islands and 
volcanic mountains, connected by them with the Asbestos legends, 1^32 
which mountains they were seeing near the Moluccas. ^i^a They do 
not seem however to have discovered the clove and nutmeg at that 
time as the first intimation we have of these spices dates only of the 
first century of our era (see par. 278). 

281. A descriptive work now lost was then written about the famous 
ships of people from the outer west, then trading in China Sea. A 
quotation from it in another work, also lost, of the third century, tells 
us that these ships were over 200 spans long, raising from 20 to 30 
spans above the water ; they carried 600 or 700 men, and their cargo 
filled 10,000 pecks. 



260 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

The term tclmen, shun, Malay jung, whence the Portuguese and our 
jiink was gradually applied chiefly to Chinese ships, and that of bak or 
p'ak was applied to the ocean going ships of foreigners who called 
them thus. ^'35 

In a previous chapter we have had occasion to quote a Chinese 
description of the ships of Funam-Cambodja in the third century, 
on board which were transhipped Indian goods for China 
(note 482). 

The Periple of the Erythroean Sea enumerates five kinds of vessels 
engaged in the trade of the Hindus : Madratie, stitched boats, like the 
Masula boats of Madras, and the smaller Patamar boats of Bombay ; 
Trappable and Kotymhcc, long fishing boats and pilot boats at the 
mouths of rivers ; Sanganc, sea-boats or double-banked canoes, i.e., 
the Jangars now used on the rivers of the Malabar coast like the 
Malay prahus ; and the Kolandiophantic or Bantings, ships of great 
size, which as well as the Sangarte, were employed in the Chersonese 
trade. ^i3s 

282. The First Han dynasty saw the birth of the Chinese navy ; the 
south-east coasts, i.e., those of Yueh or Tchehkiang S., and Fuhkien, 
were its birthplace. The skilfulness of their populations in the man- 
agement of boats had long been known, and the Chinese conquest 
made their navy its own. We have had already occasion of speaking 
of their ships and of the peculiarities they derived from the Erythroean 
merchantmen. In 138 B.C. the state of Min-yueh {mipr. 201) had 
thrown over the yoke of the Nan-yueh Empire [supr. 251) and attacked 
in the same year their northern neighbours the Tung-Nt/ou {siipr. 250), 
and in 13.') B.C. the Nan-yueh itself. For these purposes they had 
gone into building themselves some pooped-junks [lou-tchuen).^^^^ In 
112 B.C. the king of Timg-yueh^^^^ was able to send in his own 
pooped-junks 8,000 men from the present Fuhtchou to pres. Tchao- 
tchou (near Swatow, then Kieh-yang, in Kwang-tung East), but the 
unruly waves of the ocean partly disturbed his fleet, as his mariners 
were yet unexperienced. The year after the Chinese built some 
pooped-junks at Kii-tchang, near pres. Ningpo, in order to attack by 
sea^^^^ and by land the Tung-yueh^^^*^ which was conquered and given 
up as told before. '^'•^ The pooped-junks built for war purposes were 
sea-going ships, ^^^- and the Chinese Emperor was enabled to 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 261 

send envoys by sea to get for him some glass from the emporium of 
the western traders. 

283. In 41 A.D. the Chinese navy proved useful in the reconqucst of 
Tunking (then Kiao-tcld) after the rebellion of Trung-trac, the 
Tungkinese Joan of Arc, and again in 22G A.D. when the Wu Kingdom 
with its capital at Nanking (then Kien-yeh), conquered Annam, inde- 
pendent since 186 A.D., down to KuteJ;, or Kattigara.ii'*^ About 230 
a maritime expedition, under the command of Kang-tai and of 
Tchu-yng, was sent to report upon the Funam {i.e. the country of the 
Phnom, or Cambodja),'!'*^ and other countries. 'i^'' The importance of 
this scientific mission as shown by the fragments Avhich remain of its 
record cannot be overestimated for the history of these countries. 
Fifty years later, the Western Tsin dynasty gave some impetus to the 
navy, and no less than ten different sorts of ships were exhibited in 
the ponds of the Imperial park. A large junk of 120 double-paces 
long was built, exceeding in its size and number of oars anything that 
had been made before. ^^^^ A boat with a south-pointing magnet^i^^ 
was exhibited in 342 A.D. in the viiiKj ho tchi, or pond of the cakling 
crane, at Lin-tchang (then Yeh, in Tchangtehfu, Honan), but this 
great invention remained for long a toy and nothing more ; perhaps 
it was looked with contempt because the invention of a Tartar named 
Hiaifei, for Shih-hu, fourth king of the small Tartar dynasty of the 
After Tchao, then ruling in North China (330-351 A.D.). At the 
beginning of the fifth century Chinese ships were not yet going as far 
as Java. Soon afterwards maritime enterprise developed and Chinese 
junks, about 4.50 A.D., were navigating as far as Ceylon and also as 
far as Hira, at the Head of the Persian Gulf. 

Notes. — 

1129) Cf. supra par. 204, also 180, 198, and notes 474-5. 

1130) In the primitive times of near coasting navigation it can be 
understood that they should at first have passed through the Malacca 
Straits ; but in later times when the larger size of the ships 
permitted to have on board a greater supply of fresh water, and 
thus save many stations, a bolder course could often be taken, and 
land lost sight of for some time when required. 

1131) The great eruption of 416 A.D., which according to the 
Pristaka Puija of Java, opened the Sunda Straits (sup. note 474) 
was apparently felt as far as Pegu, as the Burmese historians date the 
retreating of the ocean at Prome from a terrible earthquake which 



262 ORIGIN OF THE EAKLY 

took place in the fifth century. Cf. E. Forchhammer, Notes on the 
Earlij History of British Bunnah, ii. 8. 

1132) Supra, notes 761-2. 

1133) Cf Tung Fang So, Shen y Kiny.—Shih tchou Ki.—T P.Y.L. 
820, 8 ; 868, 8 ; 869, I.Shan Hai King. xvi. 4, .5, and Kwoh-poh's 
comm. — Wu luh ti U tela. — Fao poh tze : T.P., 786, 8. — Hiuen 
tchuny Ki. — Nan she. — Kang tai, Fu-nam tn siih tchuen. — Wan 
Tchen, Nan /any y imhtchl: T P. 787, 4 v.; 820, 10.— *The names 
of Suh kill and Ma-nyu islands are mentioned Avith reference to these 
Fire Islands in the writers of the third century. Ma-nyu, i.e., the 
Moluccas and Suh-kiu which was the Fire Island. It is most 
probably Sanyir, N. Celebes, which its recent eruption has made 
famous. — Ho-liny, or Java, was also referred to, as shown in 
note 762. ■■'■ Cf. also Matouanlin, tr. D'Hervey, ii. 449, 519. 

1134) The Wai yiljen miny tchuen author unnamed, in Wan tchen, 
Nan tchuu y ivuh tchi, or Description of remarkable things of the 
South; T.P.Y.L., 760, 6. 

1135) Cf. The Bayla of the west coast of India, unchanged since the 
days of Alexander. Cf. Ed. Balfour. Cyclop. Ind. i. 396. — Anc. 
Tamil pakada, Arab niarkib. 

1136) Cf. T. Braddell, The Ancient Trade of the Indian Archipelayo, 
Singapore, 18.57, l.c.p. 143. — Ed. Balfour, Cyclop. Ind., art. Boats. 

1137) The Yueh tsiich shu (cf. 150 A.D.) tells us that on the removal 
of the capital of Yueh to Lang-ya in 472 B.C. {supr. par. 174) MukoJi, 
i.e., the wood guest, brother of Kou-tsien, the king, commanded that 
2800 soldiers should be sent there on lou-tchuen, or pooped junks. 
(T.P.Y L., 771, 2 V.) The soubriquet given to the leader and the 
names of the ships show that these belonged to the Erythroean 
navy then frequenting the coasts for commercial purposes. Cf. lou 
(137. 11144 or 4466 Bas.) and skr. nan, ship. — Tchou, was a small 
boat, and tchuen a larger one requiring five wooden boards. (Cf Hon 
Wei Tony tu ki : T. P., 770, 1.) — On 300 tchou sent from Yueh in 
312 B.C. cf. par. 202. — Kung Tsung-tze made a great praise of the 
mariners of Yueh to the King of Hccn, a short time before the 
conquest of the latter by T'sin in 231 B C. Another praise Avas 
made by Yen-tsu in i:}4 B.C.— Cf. also n. 444, 477-482. The pre- 
cited Yueh tsiieh ,s7t?( contains a curious answer of Tze-sil to Hoh-lii, 
King of Wu, 514-4'.»5B.C., on the arrangement at sea of a squadron 
comprising small and cargo boats, pooped- junks .^i'ao -junks and 
leader's junk. Cf. T. P. Y. L., 770, 1 v. On Tze-sil, or Wu-yun. 
Cf Mayers, Cliincse Readers' Manual, 879. Also Tso tchuen xii, 
xi., 4. — The story looks like a later amplification. — Pleasure boats 
are mentioned for the first time at the same date. Duke Kiny of 
Ts'i 547-48'* B.C. is reputed to have made a pleasure boat called 
" Lotus leaf," which was manned by the " Dames du Palais." 
Before 484 B.C. Fu-tcha, King of Wu, had a boat called the " Green 
Dragon," on which he made a daily trip in an artificial pond called 
"The Celestial Pond," with the peerless beauty Si-shi. These 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 263 

are given as the earliest instances of the so called Flower Boats 
by Prof. G. Schlegel, A Canton Flower lioat, Intern. Arch, of 
Ethnogr., 1894.— Cf. Koh tchi Kiwi yiien, Kiv. 28, ibid. ; W. F 
Mayers, Chinese Readers' 'Manual, i., 139, 571. And also Jules 
Arenes, La Chine familiere et ijalante, 1876. 

1138) The Chinese interfered, and while Yen-ts'u, the general in 
command, was collecting boats at Kwei-ki, near pres. Ningpo, 
to attack Min-yueh, the latter withdrew their troops. And the 
Marquis Kung-wu, King of Tung-ngou (near pres. Wen-tchou of 
Tchehkiang, S.), was enabled to remove with 10,000 men and settle 
in Lii Kiang Kiun, w. of Lu-tchou in Anhwei W. — Cf. She-kl, 
114, 2 v., and comm. 

1139) Han Wu Ti in 119 B.C. had a pooped-junk of that pattern 
exhibited in a pond of the capital. Cf. Supr. par. 129, note 481. 

1140) Or Eastern Yueh. A new title assumed by the brother, mur- 
derer of the King of Min-yueh, with Chinese approval. 

1141) Cf. Szema Tsien, She-ki, 114, 3, 4. 

1142) Cf. for a similar case in the Persian Gulf. Supr. 116. 

1143) CL Supra. §§260,261. 

1144) Phnom is mountain in Cambodian. A high mountain near 
Chantabon was the landmark for mariners and slave dhows. Cf. 
Reinaud, Eelation des Voi/af/es faits 2^ar les Arabes, i. 18. — J. Crawfurd, 
Journal of an Emhasy to Siam, 1830, ii. 206. — H. Yule, Notes on the 
oldest records of the Sea-route to China, 1882, p. 8. 

1145) Cf. Liami shn, kiv. 54.— T. P. Y. L. 787, 3.— " They went to 
or heard from a hundred or more countries and made an account 
of them." — Kang-tai wrote a work on the native customs of Funam, 
Fnnam tu snh Tchiien ; his companion wrote Historical Record of 
Funam, or Funam hi, and a description of the curious things of 
Funam, or Funam yli wnh tchi. Several works written in the third 
century contained many information derived from the same expedi- 
tion, viz., a description of curious things of southern provinces, or 
Nan tchoH i/h wiih tchi, by Wan shen. Reports on foreign countries 
under the Wu period, or Wn shi wai kwoh tckuen. Only quotations 
from these works have been preserved. — The founder of Cambodia 
arrived there from India on board of an Omanite merchantman, 
about 50 B.C. 

1146) Tsin-shu. — Tsin Kiinij Ko mimj. — T. P. Y. L., 768, 3 v., 5 v., 
769, 1 V. 

1147) Cf, Excursus on South-pointiwj Chariots and Maritime 
Compass §§ 305-308. 



264 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 



Chap. VIII. — Excursus. 

The Si Wawj Ma and Muh Wantf's Expedition to Turkeatan 

in 986 B.C. 



28 i. The name of Si Wang Mu, yihiah. means literally Royal Mother 
of the West, has been a peg for all sorts of fables and myths in the 
romantic school of Chinese literature. European writers have some- 
what improved upon the Chinese under that respect, and some of the 
good Jesuits of the eighteenth century have seriously suggested that 
the Royal Mother of the West was no other than the -Queen of Sheba ! 
All this nonsense once discarded, it is undeniable that there is a 
substratum of truth concerning the personages so denominated in the 
course of Chinese history, and that the Si Wang Mus have played an 
important part in the ancient relations of China with the west. 

285. A genuine queen may have been the person referred to when the 
name was written down for the first time, in the allusive mode of 
meaning and sound combination, proper to the Chinese scribes. ^i-** 
And in the later ages, the presence of Queendoms in the north west 
and east parts of Tibet, which have survived in comparatively modern 
times,ii4' has helped to keep the popular notion that a Si Wang-mu 
had always a feminine character, and was only one immortal queen- 
There is however nothing in any of the ancient texts on the subject to 
indicate that Si Wang-mu iras a uwman. 

286. According to tradition Yu-Nai Hwang-ti, leader of the l'>ak sings 
was presented by a Si Wang-mu with some white jade rings, archers' 
thimbles and topographical maps. This is probably an amplified view 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 265 

of a circumstance that took take place when he was travelling east- 
wards through Turkestan to the Flowery Land. During Yao's reign 
Hou Y, the famous archer, obtained from a Si Wang-7uu some of their 
famous drug^i^*^ (against consumption). Under the reign of Shun a 
Si Wang-mu presented some rings of white jade. The great Yii also 
had some relations with a Si Wang-mu. Shang Tai Mou sent Wang 
Meng, c. 1538 B.C., with some presents to the Si Wang-mu, to get 
some of the valuable drug. In 986 B.C. Muh Wang of Tchou started 
for his expedition in the west, during which he visited the Si Wang- 
inii, who in 984 came to the Chinese court ^'^^ 

287. The most important references to the Si Wang-mu are those 
which occur in the MuJt THen-tze tchuen, a narrative concerning the 
journey we have just spoken of made in the west by Muh, the king, 
called Son of Heaven. i^^- This work had always been undervalued 
because of the wondrous amplifications of the Taoszeist writers on the 
subject. Stripped of a few exaggerations, the original relation has all 
the characters of a genuine work of very ancient date concerning the 
various journeys of Muh Wang, 1001-946 B.C., the fifth ruler of the 
TcHou dynasty. Dr. J. Eitel who has published it in English, in 
18S9, tells us that he is convinced that the main portion of this 
narrative is of very ancient date, not long after the events it records, 
and I agree with him in the matter. 

In the longest of these journeys, which alone lasted twelve months 
of travelling and four months of rest, Muh Wang Avent as far as 
Karashar, if not further west, and he paid a visit to the country of 
Si Wang-mu and to its sovereign. 

Notes — 

1148) Si, West is no part of the transcription of the name, and must 
be taken in its geographical sense. Cf. Shan hai King, xvi., 2 i'. — 
On the mythological aspect of Si \Vanri-mu, cf. W. F. Mayers, The 
Western King Mother: Notes and Queries, Hong Kong, ] 868, ii. 
p. 12-14, and his Manual, n. 572. — Cf. Also, anpra p. 32, and the 
references, n. 163-168, and add. 164. 

1149) Cf. Note 164 and add. 

1150) A fir balsam with asafoetida. Cf. below Note 1162. 

1151) Shuy gnq t'u. — Kwa ti tn. — Bamboo Annals, iv., ix., 26 ; vv., 15, 
11.— Tai ping gii Ian, 85, 2-3 ; 693, 5 v., 7 r. ; 790, 4 ; 872, 12. 

1152) On this title cf. supra. Note 607. 



266 OKIGIK OF THE EARLY 

288. We shall enumerate briefly the principal stations of his 
journey. On the 169th day of the narrative, Muh Wang bound for 
his west journey, crossed the Ho, or Yellow River.^i^s After 53 days 
travelling and several stations he stopped at the out-lying hills 
of the Kwen-lun {i.e., the Nan-shan), in front of the river Tchih 
(Red, i.e., the Hung-shui of Kansuh), where he saw the remains of a 
palace of Hwang-ti. On the 231st day, he started northwards and 
ascended the mount Tcliung^^^^ {i,e., the north side of the Nan-shan), 
near which is a genial and pleasant place, which the kings of antiquity 
had called accordingly Ilinen-pu, or Sombre Garden^ i^'^ (in the present 
Kan-tchou of Kansuh). A few days later he reached the country of 
the TchHh- Wu tribe, whose chief traced his descent back to the family 
of the TcHou dynasty. On the 244th day he crossed the Yang 
river,ii5'' q^^^ i\^q ^^y after he arrived at the country of the Ts'ao-nu 
tribes, then marching northwards and turning round for two days 
towards the east, he reached the Heh (black) river^i^**, which is called 
Hunij-lu by the people of the western desert {i.e., the Bulunghir 
river), and going northwards he followed the course of that river. On 
the 257th day he arrived at the mount of Ki' un-yiih^^^^ (lit. mass of 
gem, near Turfan), which was guarded by the Yung-shing tribe. He 
obtained there three cart-loads of gem-slabs. Here was the place 
which the kings of former times called TcKch-fu.^^^^ 

289. On the 261st day he marched northwards, passing through the 
country of another tribe (name lost) and arrived westward three days 
later to that of the Ki-lu or I-lu tribe near mount Tieli,^^^'^ in Turfan. 
West of these, four days afterwards, he reached the country of the 
Yn-kan tribe. On the 273rd he arrived near the Hiuen tch'i, or 
Sombre Lake, and near the Loh tchH, or Delightful Lake, near which 
he planted bamboos, whence the after name of Tcliuk-lin, or bamboo 
grove given to that spot. Continuing his route westwards he arrived 
six days later at K'u slian,^^*^'^ which the people of the western desert call 
Mou yuen, i.e.. Luxuriant Gardens. Here it was that he tasted the 
K'ti fruits. Advancing westwards he stayed overnight on the spur of 
the Htoang slut, or Yellow Rats Hills, and four days later, still more 
west he reached the 8i Wang-mu people. He stayed there for six 
days in feasts and and receptions near the Yao tch'i, i.e., Gemmy 
Lake and the Yen hills. ''•''^ On the 332nd day he settled on the 
banks of the Juk river, near which is a place where the birds shed their 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 



267 



feathers. On the 882nd day, after a sojourn of three months in 
Kwang-yue.n, i.".., the great plain, he turned eastwards on his return 
journey. 

290. Ninety days' stay in Kivamj-yuen, make Muh-Wang arrive 
there six days only after he had first reached the country of Si Wang- 
mu. It was therefore in the vicinity of the latter country. Several 
features reported in the narrative permit most probable identifications 
of the localities referred to in the last instances. Deducting seven 
days of rest on the route, Muh Wang had journeyed for 22 days from 
the Mass of Gems to the country of the Western Wang-mu. The 
remarkable heap of agate stones in question being situated between 
Pidjan and Turfan, is a landmark that cannot be mistaken. Muh 
Wang therefore should have gone further west between Karashar and 
Kutcha, where there is a level plain spoken of by Hiuen-Tsangi^'^'^which 
should be the Kwan{i-yuen, where he made his long sojourn. Th® 
sand rats, or yellow rats, which he met before, have been severally 
spoken of by travellers in Eastern Turkestan. They are frequently 
met with between Turfan and Khotan •,^'^'^'^ and although the fact of 
their being spoken of in the narrative vouchsafes its genuineness and 
accuracy, it does not by itself indicate which spot between the two 
regions is referred to. 

291. As to the place where the birds cast their feathers in such 
numbers that a hundred cars were laden with feathers alone, we do 
not find any such place spoken of in the scanty information we possess 
on this part of Eastern Turkestan, i.e., between Karashar and Kutcha. 
One may have existed there, as in other parts of Turkestan, unless 
these so-called feathers should not be feathers at all, and be pampas 
grass which as we know is also found in central Asia j^^^^ but we have 
not heard that any such feather-grass should have been found in the 
Tarym Valley. The most probable explanation is that the meaning of 
the text is more extensive geographically than could be supposed at 
first. The Juh river, anciently Xuh, and meaning literally " water 
defiled by mud," seems to apply to the Khaidu-(jol, or River of 
Karashar, which deverses its waters in the Barjaratch Kul or lake from 
where under the name of Ahaidin-kiva, or Kontche-daria, it flows into 
the great Tarym river. i^*^^ The latter disembogues or dies into the 
Lop-nor, just southwards of Karashar, and it is in the Lop-nor that 



268 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

since remote times such a place is spoken of, where birds roost and 
moult. 

292. The narrative is silent on what Muh Wang did or heard of 
during his three months near Karashar. Hunting would seem to have 
been his sole occupation. But having advanced so far as that into 
Turkestan, it would have been surprising that his expedition should 
not have learned or seen something from lands further in the west. 
This may have been the object of another recit which may have been 
lost, but from which scraps of information have been preserved in 
other works. For instance, we are told that Muh Wang received 
there a mirror or magnifying glass (hwo t'si) from the country of Tsiu- 
kiil (or Yarkand ?)ii6Si ^.nd from the narrative itself we learn that 
when coming back on the banks of the Black River, he instructed the 
people to fuse certain stones found there, so as to make with various 
sorts of objects for ornament^i*^^ This looks much like a recently 
acquired knowledge of making some sort of glass and false gems.^^^*^ 
We may mention also as suggesting that Muh Wang, while in the 
great plain of Eastern Turkestan, had some relations with the farther 
west, the well-known legend that he married his daughter to the King 
of Persia, which Firdousi has reported. It may have had some slight 
foundation in the fact of an alliance of a daughter of Muh Wang with 
one of the princes of Khorasan. A circumstance interesting to remark is 
that at Herat (old Alexandria, Chinese 0-yk-shan-li), when the notice 
about it was compiled during the First Han dynasty, it was reported 
that the elders there were acquainted with the Si Wang Mus and the 
Weak Waters (the emboguing waters of the Tarym river in the Lop- 
nor lake) The interest of this lies in the fact that Herat was the 
arrival or departure place of the great trade route with China.ii''i 

Notes. — 

1153) His advance-guard was under the command of Poh-yao 
throughout his march to the countries of the far west. He was a 
descendant of Wn y (5454-1808 Bas.), otherwise Ho-tsung, i.e., the 
Venerable of the (Yellow) River, to whom Muh Wang offered two 
sacrifices. Cf. par. 11, 13-15, and 16 of the narrative. On Ho- 
tsung, or Ho Poh, cf. supra note 395. 

1154) On this river, cf. the authorities in Dutrueil de Rhins, Asie 
Ccmtralc, p. 117. It is still at present called Red River, Hung shui, 
and Hows into the Tola. 

1155) Mount Tchuny, or Ji orta r Mountain (8695 Bas.) The word 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 269 

is sometimes written (also lir)22 or 11583 Bas.) Bell, whence a 
confusion from some writers with the mountains of the same name 
ou the borders of Shansi. The original was probably intended to be 
the Tchuni/, 111373 Bas., or piled up mounts, because of their height, 
and thus might be the Bai/an shan, Great Mountains. 

1156) Cf. Tchang >/e Id. Tai pine; yii Ian, kiv. 65, 3. Hhan Hai 
King, ii., 14, 15, text and commentaries. 

1157) He met there the Tchany Kung, or Long Armed people. On 
the Yang and lleli rivers, cf. Shang Hai King, ii., 18, and for the 
ICi Kung people, vii. 1 v. 

1158) The Bulunghir River, or Sule River, deverses its waters in the 
Kara nor. Hung-lu, the local name in 1000 B.C., suggests the 
Mongol Khara, Turk Kara. In Hiuen Tsang's life the same river 
is called Hu-lu. Cf. tr. Beal, i., 17, and Life, 13. Also Dutrueil 
de Rhins, Asie Centrale, 125. The Heh, i.e., Black River, is said to 
flow from the San-wei hills (two miles S.E. of Sha tchou in W. 
Kansuh), and afterwards to run east and west. Cf. Shan llai King, 
com. ii., 16, 21, which description applies to the Bulunghir. 

1159) The All-Gems' mountain has also been called Bak-iji'ih mount \ 
(i.e., Peh-yl'ih, white gems). The Shan }iai King, xiii., 10 v., speaks 

of the west lake (Si hu. 8472 for 5108 Bas.), with the Peh gnh shan 
on the S.W. of which run the moving sands. In the neighbour- 
hood is a hill of very hard and bright stones white lijie bones, spoken _ 
of by travellers (cf. E Bretschneider, Mcdiacal Eesearches, ii. 18!-*), 
which is undoubtedly the Hill of White Gems, or All-gems' 
Mountain of our text. The old geographers tell us of a hill, west 
of Turfan, " S'elevant en terrasses superposees, toutes formees par 
des galets d'agates. . . . La roche ne doit son eclat qu'aux 
brillantes agates " (cf. Amiot, in Memoires concernant les Chinois, 
xiv.; E. Reclus, VAsie Orientale, p. 160). It has long been known 
to the Chinese. Nai-Hwang-ti, going east, is said to have stopped 
there. Under Tchuan-hiuh, the Red Hills State, i.e., the Hwo tchou 
near Turfan is said to have sent him water pitchers made of agate. 
Later on agate brought from there passed through the country of 
the Yueh-ti (An-si tchou of W. Kansuh) and it is from there that 
the Chinese get their best agate to the present day. Some confusion 
have occasionally been made between the heap of agate and the 
Bogdo ola, or Li7ig shan, the Sacred Mountain near Urumtsi. 

1160) TcKeh-fu, 7457-2514, Bas., translated by Dr. Eitel : Record- 
office. 

1161) Probably the Yen-tze shan of later times (cf. Shan Hai King, 
ii., 28 V. The Chinese travellers speak in all this region of a kind 
of iron yelded by magnetic iron ore, cf. E. Bretschneider, Mech'ceval 
Researches, ii., 180, 183, 193. KiMi, 809-11691, or Y-lu 4612- 
11691 Bas., is perhaps an antecedent of that of Hi which has sur- 
vived to the present day further west. 

1162) K'n shan, 8874-cl. 46 Bas., lilt.. Bitter's Mount, cannot be 
understood as Mount Brinjal as translated by Dr. Eitel (probably 



270 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

because of K''u-hioa, 8874, cl. 97 Bas. litt., bitter gourd, which 
was wrongly supposed to be the solarium melangena or brinjal. 
For instance in Doolittle's Vocab.) But Dr. Bretschneider, Botnn 
iSinic, ii., 387, tells us that the K'u kwa is the momordica 
charantia, which, the Pen tsno kang-muh of 1578 says, was intro- 
duced from the south, and therefore cannot be the intended plant, 
which I think was one of those producing asafos/ido., for which the 
region north of Karashar has been renowned since antiquity. 
Asafwtido , from the Persian nza, mastic, which is largely used 
as a condiment by Asiatics, was Avith fir-bark and birds' fat the 
principal ingredients of the famous fir-balsam employed as a successful 
drug against consumption ; it was therefore a life-prolonging 
medicine, and gave rise to the opinion amongst the Chinese of the 
contending states period, that Si Wang-mu, like the foreigners 
coming by the eastern coasts, was in possession of the drug of 
■ immortality. The balsam in question, it is alleged, was" already 
known in the age of Yao. The word Kn must be taken as an 
imitation of the local name of the asafcetida, which local name at 
the time of Muh Wang was apparently of Aryan origin (cf . Ku with 
the later Chinese c/-//z^ei, a-wei imitating the Persian angnzeh, and 
the Sanskrit liivgu). In the Pen tsao King of the first century 
containing information on the materia medica of olden times, the 
medical virtues of the pine are registered ; the pine's fingers (i e., the 
kernels), and the grease or fat (i c, the resinej, if used lighten the 
body and prolong the years of life (T.P., 953, 6 r.) ; they were 
^ imported into China for that purpose from the N.W., according to 
the Ki jan of Fan-tze (T.P., 953, 6), therefore from the direction 
of Si Wang-mu's country. The marvellous character attributed to 
this plant and fruit of that region has been extended to others. For 
\ instance, the Lycium of Turkestan and Kansuh, of which the red 
berries once dried are imported, at first in Kansuh only, and more 
recently in other provinces, has received several names to that efiect, 
viz.: k'uk'i, 8874-4098 Bas., or bitter k'i ; kou k'i, 4149-4098 
Bas.; Sien jen tchavg or Richi's staff, Si Wang-mu's staft", heavenly 
essence or V ien tsing, none oldness or kiuh lao, earth bone or ti kn 
(the root). For the foregoing facts, cf. : Pen tsno King (150 B.C.), 
Wu fhi Pen tsao (250 A.D.), Pao foh-ize (800 A.D.), Hiao King 
yi'ian shen kH (our era), Hioai-nan-ize (150 B.C.) ap. T.P.Y.L., 
984, 5 v., 990, 8 z/; E. Bretschneider, Chinese intercoiirse with the 
countries of Asia, a.i't Bwo-chon, and Botnnicum Sinicnm, ii., 
526 ; Description de la Chine Occidentale, trad. Gueluy, ch. iv., 
Kreitner, Oestr. Mon.f. d. Orient, 1883, p. 73-G. 

1163) Yen hills, same character than in Yen-tze hills. Supra Note 
1161. Cf. iShan hai King, ii., 18 v. 

1164) Cf. Life of Hiuen Tsang, tr. Beal, p. 37. 

1165) Cf. Supra note 761 on asbestos. On the sand rats of Turfan» 
cf. the Ming geography and Bretschneider, Mediaeval Researches, 
ii., 192. On these on the route to Khotan, cf. Shih too An'si yii 
tchi, quoted in the 1' Yuan of A.D. 400 : T.P.L.Y., 797, 8-9, and 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 271 

911, 6. Hiueu Tsang (tr. Beal, ii., 315) at Khotan, was told the 
same story that Herodotus, ii., 141, had preserved of an enemy's 
army disabled by rats having gnawed the weapons leather at niglit. 
The story is so similar that its importation into Khotan is clear. 
On the Greek story, cf. A. H. Sayce, Herodotus, p. 205 ; G. 
Rawlinson, Herodotus, vol. ii., p. 220. The same sand rats are at 
the bottom of the fable of the Golden Ants of Herodotus, iii. 102. 
Megasthenes (ap. Strab. xv., 706), Nearchus (ap. Arrian Indie. 15), 
Dio, Pliny, Mela, kc , the pippilika of the MahabJiarafa, i., 375, 
?;. 1860 ; as shown by Mrs. ST^iers, Ancient India, p. 216 ; Sam. 
Beal, I.e. ; Bunbury, Hist. Anr. Geo;/., i., 227, 257 ; G. Rawlinson, 
I.e. ; Lassen, Ind. Alter., i., 849. 

1155) The text says that in the wilderness of the great plain there 
is a swamp with fresh water and hills and plains where birds shed 
their feathers. This might permit us to understand the Lop-nor 
which is right south of Karashar, therefore not so far distant after 
all, and where such a station for birds has been spoken of for 
centuries. See for instance the iShan had King, ii. 21 v. ; vii., 1 ; 
XV., 1 ; and in modern times the report of Ye-lu Tchu-tsai's 
journey in the thirteenth century, ap. E. Bretschneider, Chinese 
MedicGval Travellers, 113. 

1166) For instance in the desert near the River Ischim grows a sort 
of grass which exactly resembles white plumes or feathers, and may 
be dried and preserved a great while. Cf. P. J. van Strahlenberg, 
Description, p. 362. 

1167) Cf. E. Reclus, L'Asie Orientale, p. 118. 

1168) Tsiii Kiu—So-Kiii and Sha-Kiu, T. P. Y. L., 717, 4 v. This 
Tsiu-Ki'H, 14-5078 Bas., must not be confused with the Tsiii-Kiii, 
4892-5078 Bas., said to be an official title among the Hiung-nus, 
and the family name of the Northern Liang Tartar dynasty which 
ruled in Kansuh, A.D. 397-428. Cf. the original Shih luh ku-oh 
tchun tsiu, Peh Liang luh, of Ts'uy Hung, ap. T. P. Y. L., 124, 8. 

1169) Muh Tien-tie tchuen, § 72. 

1170) Chinese are famous in the art of making false gems, but not 
in that of making glass. The latter process was finally introduced 
amongst them in A.D. 435 from Cabul. Cf. F. Hirth, China and 
the Rowan Orient, p. 230; and T. de L., On the Ancient History of 
Glass and Coal in China : T'oung pao, 1891. 

1171) For Muh Wang and the marriage, cf. Firdousi, Sluih Kameh. 
G. Pauthier, Uclations Politiqucs de la Chine avec les puissances 
Occidentales, 1859, p. 14. And for Alexandria, cf. Tsien Ilan Shu, 
Kiv. 96 ; tr. Wylie, I.e. p. 19. In later texts this simple statement 
has been replaced by a quotation without reference from the Shan 
Hai King (cf. supra note 276) which made it unclear, and an occasion 
of useless speculations by several orientalists. On the trade route 
and Herat, cf. n. 1283. On the marriage, cf. n. 171 and add. 171. 



272 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

293. We gather from other sources some more information about 
the location of the state of Si Wang-mu which confirm and concur 
with that derived from the narrative of Muh Wang's journey. 

The second book, one of the oldest of the Shan Hai Kitifi^^^^ tells us 
that in the west of the Flowing Sands is the Mount of Gems {Yii shaji) 
where the Si Wang Mus reside. This mount is identified by all the 
commentators with the mount Mass of Gems {Kiun yii) of Muh 
Wang's journey which we have seen to be the Mount of Agate spoken 
of by the old travellers, near Turfan, W. 

From a mythological account in a later book of the same work.ii'^^ 
we are given to understand that the Si Wang Mus had on their south 
the region where birds roosted (near the Lop-nor, as seen before) and 
that the latter place was northwards of the spurs of the Kwen-lun 
range, which is exact. 

A further statement of the same work^i'^* says that " on the margin 
of the Flowing Sands, after the Red River (of Kansuh, S.W.), and in 
front (i.e. south) of the Black River (of Kansuh, N.W,) are the great 
mountains of the Kwen-lun ; at the bottom of these are the weak 
waters (of the Lop-nor) ; beyond these is the Yen hwo shan, or 
Mountain of the Blazing Fire, which throws things suddenly in the 
air, on the spurs of which the Si Wang Mus reside." The mountain 
referred to cannot be mistaken for any other than the Aghic, or Fire 
Mountain, the Peh shan of modern Chinese maps, visited by a Russian 
traveller in 1881, at 16 versts north-east of Kutcha, which sends away 
smoke and sulphurous gas ; its fires are said not to be volcanic as 
supposed before, and to proceed from burning coaL^^''^ 

The foregoing statement of the Shan Hai Kinij, which came from 
different sources and various dates, indicate the region between 
Karashar and Kutcha, on the slopes of the Tien shan as the residence 
of the Si Wang Mus. It is exactly that which our examination of the 
narrative of Muh Wang's journey has led us to recognise. 

294. Confirmative evidence may be quoted from other works. 
Hwai-nan-tze was aware that the domain of the Si Wang Mus was 
beyond the brink of the Flowing Sands. ii^« In the geographical 
chapter of the Han dynastic Annals, the same country is said to be in 
the north beyond the Lop-nor.ii" The Records of Sha tchou (W. 
Kansuh) of the T'ang period, 'i'« and the History of the Sixteen 
Kingdoms by Ts'uy Hung, of A.D. 500,11^9 tell us that the hills of 



CHINESE CmLISATION. 273 

Tch'u-pu, where the Si Wang Mus used to reside, were N.E. of Yang- 
Kwuh (whose name underlies that of Yanghi-shar, east of Kutcha, 
which appears on some maps).ii8o ji^g mounts spoken of would be 
the Bairak tagh, on the west of Karashar, and the authority given by the 
author of the Sha tchoii hi for his statement is not borrowed from 
literature ; it rests on the local tradition among Kiamj Tibetans and 
Hu or western people. ^i^i 

These identifications permit us to recognise in the Mou yuen, or 
Luxuriant Garden of Muh Wang's journey, the Ynlduz plateau, 
covered with luxuriant herbage, and celebrated throughout central 
Asia to the present day for its beauty, which Przevalsky was the first 
European to visit in 1877.^^^2 

295. Feminine memories would seem to linger round the country 
which we have been able to identify with the former residence of the 
Si Wang Mus. In the south-east of Kutcha, one finds the Baba kul 
or Lake of Women ;ii**3 [^ might be the result of a reaction of the 
Chinese fabled account, as the queen-ruled states belong to the northern 
territory of Tibet, west and east, but not the north side of the Tarym 
valley. Should we trust the Chinese description whicli from its 
inception has never varied, a queen should have been the ruler, when 
the first relations began with the Chinese, but it does not follow that 
she should have always been succeeded by other queens. As remarked 
at the beginning of this note, there is no evidence in any of the ancient 
texts that the Si Wang Mus were queens. 

296. Si Wang-mu, as we have seen, means the Wang-vni of the 
west, and this Wany-mu is undoubtedly an attempt at imitating with 
an appropriate meaning the foreign name or title of the sovereign 
referred to. The word has happily not suffered much from phonetic 
alteration. It should have been Kam - m u, K iv a in - m u, or nearly 
so.ii«'i 

This gives us a well-known royal denomination among the popu- 
lation of antiquity inhabiting the north-west from the skirts of the 
Chinese province of Kansuh, to the north of the Tarym valley and 
the T'mi shan range, population called IVu-suns in Chinese history. i^^^ 
Kun-mo was the title of their sovereign, which has become Kam-mu, 
and afterwards the Wang-mu of the west of the Chinese. Their 
queens seem to have enjoyed royal prerogatives, ^^^^ and one of 



274 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

them may have ruled when the Chinese became acquainted with them 
for the first time. Their country corresponded to that which the 
Chinese sources have shown us to be that of Si Wang Mus. An 
interesting problem of history has thus received its solution. 

Notes. — 

1172) Shan Hal Kin;/, ii., 18, 19. In ch. xvi. 2 c. it says that the 
mountains of Si Wang-mu are the Hoh shan, 1740, cl. 46, Bas. or, 
Hill of the Moat, and the hai shan, 4993, cl. 46, Bas., or Hill of 
the Sea. Let us remark that unlike the other lakes of East Turkes- 
tan, that which is near Karashar, the Bai/aratch Kul is generally 
called Bent/hi z, the sea (cf. E. Reclus, Asie Orientale, p. 113), and 
therefore justifies the Hai shan. 

1173) Shan Hai King, xii. 1. 

1174) Ibid., xvi. 4, 5. 

1175) It is described in the Wei shu of the 5th cent., in the Peh she 
of the 6th, in the Si ijil t'u ki of the same age, ap. T. P. Y. L., 792, 
7, 8; in the Description de la Chine Occidentale, trad. Gueluy, ch. ii.; 
Museon, Juin, 1885. Cf. Also J. Klaproth, Tabl. Hist. As., 109 : 
Ritter, ii. 333 ; Kisselefi", in Turkestan Gazette, 6 Oct., 81 ; Mush- 
ketoff, Turkestan, 1886, i. 131-133 and 172; E. Bretschneider, 
Med. Res., ii., 190, 243-6. It produces sulphur, sal ammoniac, and 
alum. 

1176) Shan Hai King, comm., ii., 19. 

1177) Han shu, Ti Ii tchi ; T.P., 65, 3 ;■. 

1178) Sha tchou ki by Twan Kwoh ; T. P., 50, 5. 

1179) Shih luh Kwoh tchun tsiu, by Ts'uy Hung ; Tai ping i/il Ian, 50, 
5. This is a quotation from the original work preserved in the 
latter cyclopa?dia of A.D. 983, and not from the alleged forgery 
under the same title of the Ming period. 

1180) Unless it be Yang shar, new town, as in R. Shaw, high 
Tartar g, Yarkand, and Kashgar, 1871, p. 175 ; but probably a false 
etymology of an older name. 

1181) Ibid., T.P., 50, 5. In the fables piled up on the deceptive 
name of Si Wang-mu, we find a connection established between her 
and the Tortoise Mountain [Tai ping Kwang Ki : Kirang po wuh tchi ; 
W. F. Mayers, N. and Q . I. c ) Now Kutcha was formerly called 
Kuh-tse or Kivei-tse, lit. Tortoise here. 

1182) Travels from Ktddja to Lohnor, p. 42, 21 ; E. Bretschneider, 
Med. Res., ii., 230. 

1183) E. Reclus, VAsie Orientale, p. 112. 

1184) In an old form of the Tchou period which I take to be a 
phonetic suggestion, it is made of Kam cl. 13 below Ran cl. 51. 
Cf. Min Ts'i-Kih, Luh shu tung, iv., 12, 13. In the oldest fan-tsieh 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 275 

transcriptions, the initial is indicated by i/ii, rain, which was r u in 
the Han period. 

1185) They were repulsed by the Hiung-nus towards the region of 
I-li about 143 B.C. In former times they covered a large area, 
and their dominion extended as far as the west borders of Kansuh, 
Cf. the sources in T. de L., K/kiu Kha/<an cDid other Tartar titha, 
1888, par. 1 and notes 18-22. 

1186) We must infer this from the fact that Kun-tno was the title 
of the king, and Kun-ti that of the queen, a peculiarity which may 
have not been remarked by the ancient Chinese. 



Sect. II. — On some Old (Tmi/raphical Knoivledne of the West. 



297. A certain amount of geographical knowledge of the west has 
been handed down from the Shang period. Y-yn, prime minister to 
the founder of that dynasty (Rect. Chr., 1686 B.C.) in a fragment 
quoted from a geographical work bearing his name by the Kih tch^nuj 
Tchou shu of the Tchou dynasty, says that northwards of China were 
the countries of the Yueh-ti and of the Ta Hia.^^^'^ As a certain Lao- 
shing-shing had come to the court of Kieh Kwei, the last ruler of the 
HiA dynasty, from the country now called Karashar,ii'^'^ situated on 
the route leading from the further west, the geographical information 
may have been obtained from him. 

In 1538 B.C some men from the west having come to Tai Mou, the ' 
seventh ruler of the Shang dynasty, the Chinese sovereign sent envoys 
who went as far as Karashar/'^*'^ Some information may have been 
also derived from their report. 

298 The Shau Hai Kin;/, kiv., xiii., fol. 1, in a chapter made of 
several fragments has preserved some interesting relics of that 
knowledge. " The country beyond the Flowing Sands (desert of 
Gobi) are those of Ta-hia,'^^^^ Shu-sha,^^^^ Kii-i/ao,^^^^- and Ywh-ti. 
The Western Hu (bearded people) and the Mount of White Gems are 
east of Ta-hia ... all west of the Flowing Sands. 

The narrative of Muh Wang's journey to Karashar, which we have 
examined, shows that this mountain of White Gems was situated in 
the immediate west of Turf an. Neglecting the well-known name of 



276 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

the Yueh-ti, who were settled in the north-west Kansuh, the three 
other names by their respective meanings, Great Summer, Raised-up 
Sands, Settled and Luxuriant, suggest stations in travelling to the 
west in Eastern Turkestan. i'^* Any attempt at seriously identifying 
them with modern localities would be most difficult. However the 
country of Great Summer could be that which near Turfan has been 
afterwards called Hiro tehou, or Fire District, because of the enormous 
heat resulting there in summer from the sun's rays on red hills. The 
Raised-up or Firm Sands indicate a region which must have been 
just outside the moving sands of the desert, while the Settled and 
Luxuriant refers undoubtedly to the Yulduz plateau, north-west of 
Karashar, the celebrated garden of central Asia.^'^^ 

Notes — 

1187; The work of Y-yn has long been lost ; fragments only have 
survived as quotations, eo nomine, in several ancient work, such as 
the Kihtcfmnu Tehou shn, and the Lii she Tchun tsiu. Cf. Pih Yuen 
Shan Hal Kin<i, comm, i. 4, 4, 4 r. ; ii. 4, 15, 16 ; v. 35 ; x. 3 ; xi. 
2 ; xiii. 1 ; xv. 1, 4 ; kc. Another ancient geographer of the same 
period was Hia Koh, who also compiled a work now lost, a few 
fragments only have been preserved as quotations. Cf. Shan Hai 
Kiwj, vi. 1, and Lieh-tze, Tang wen pien, &c. 

1188) Hwai-nan-tze. Shan Hai Kin;/, comm., ii. 19 v. 

1189) Kicoh ti til ; T. P. Y. L., 7904. Bamboo Annals, ix. 26. 

1190) Ta hia, cl. 37-1780, Bas., i.e.. Great Summer. The symbols 
are the same as those used afterwards by Tchang-Kien and others 
as an equivalent for the name of the Dah(P, on whom cf. note 249. 

1191) Shu-sha, 10333-4888 Bas., " Raised Sands." A late variant 
gives Kien-sha, 1635-4888 Bas., " Firm Sands," probably as an 
equation of meaning. 

1192) Ku-iiao, 2240-8013 Bas., "Settled Yao." As in the case 
preceding a late variant gives Shuh-i/ao, 2270-8013 Bas., " Depen- 
dent Yao." This country is most probably spoken in other books of 
the Shan Hai Kimj, vii. 3 ; T<]m yao and xvi,- 2 c 

1193) Curiously enough the name of Ta hia amongst them has 
misled some writer of the Ts'in and Han period, who has taken it for 
the Ta hia of Tchang Kien ; and finally the list has taken place in 
the curious Mosaic of the Wei lioh, on Ta Ts'in, cf. supr. 
note 27^. It is also this vague Ta hia which is mentioned in the 
inscription of Ts'in She Hwang-ti at Lang-ya, which M. Ed. 
Chavannes has translated, Les Inscriptions de$ Is'in: J. A., 1893, 
p. 500. Under the Han dynasty, Ta hia was the name of the 
present Ho tehou in Lan tehou fu of south-west Kansuh. 

1194) Sujira on ]\fiih Wani/'s journey, j 294 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 277 

Sect. III. — On the Gnomon and Sundial. 



299. The Gnomon and Sundial, in a more or less primitive con- 
dition must have been brought into China by the western civilised 
Bak-sings, under the leadership of Hwang-ti, who is traditionally 
ascribed their invention, as without them they could not have deter- 
mined their solstices and equinoxes which the first book of the 
Shu-Kiwj show them enabled to do. Moreover we see from the 
Shi- King that in the seventeenth or eighteenth century the Chinese 
knew how to determine by the measure of the shadow the position of 
a town, or more exactly how to determine the four cardinal points by 
the observation of the solar shadow. ii^'' Therefore the early Chinese 
had been taught the process, ingenious and simple, which permitted 
the Babylonians, as it did the Egyptians, to set their monuments on 
a regular orientation. n^i^ We do not know if the implement made 
use of by the Chinese was anything more than a gnomon or vertical 
staff set up on a measured ground, as the Book of Poetry in its terse- 
ness says only this: "he shadowed" [ki-ymf), in the sense of 
measuring the shadow. ^^^^ Anyhow at the beginning of the Tchou 
dynasty, i.e., circa, 1100 B C, observations made at their capital city 
with the gnomon have been verified by Laplace ^'^'^ and by Biot, who 
have found them to be substantially correct within an approximation, 
which from the complication introduced in the case by the obliquity 
of the ecliptic never understood by them, cannot have been calculated 
backwards by the Chinese in subsequent ages.^^^^ 

300. In the Ritual of the Tchou dynasty some information is given 
on the system of the sundial ; the gnomon /nao had eight feet in height, 
with a dial t'u-kwei, i.e., measuring table, of one foot five-tenths for 
the length of the shade at the summer solstice.i-'^'^ Jeh-kwei, or 
simply kivi'i, as a term for a sundial complete, is a later expression of 
the Han dynasty. '^oi 

An improvement of great importance for the scientific accuracy of 
observations made with the gnomon, and consisting of a hole at the 
top instead of a point, was introduced under the Tchou dynasty at a 
time it is difficult to ascertain, but which must have been before the 
sixth or fifth century B.C.^-'^^ As the invention is commonly attri- 
buted to the Arabs, its existence in China is worth noting at that early 
period. 



278 ORIGIN OF THE EAELY 

301. In the west the history of the gnomon and sundial is 
uneventful until comparatively late. In the eighth century B.C., 
Akhaz of Juda, then a vassal of Tiglath Pileser, had a sundiali^*^^ 
perhaps about 732 B.C., and through the relations existing between 
his country and that of his suzerain. In Isaiah xxxviii. 8, and 
2 Kings XX. !)-ll, the shadow is said to have been brought " ten 
degrees," or maluth, backwards, by which it had gone down on the 
dial of Akhaz. Anaximander set up the first gnomon in Sparta in 
B.C. 560, ^-'^'^ probably with some improvements which wrongly caused 
his name to be looked upon as that of the genuine inventor. Rome 
had no sundial before B.C. 263, and even then only an inexact one,!-"^ 
which was not put to right until B.C. 163 by G. Marcius 
Philippus.^^'j^ 

Notes. — 

1195) Shi Kin<i, iii., ii., vi., 5. This is said to have been done by a 
Chinese Duke Liu, who went to live with the Tchoii people, then 
uncivilised and even ignorant of making for themselves kiln -shaped 
huts, an art in which they were taught by Tan-fu. Cf. the same 
work III , i. It was most probably nothing else that the cave dwelling 
of Shensi (in the loess). 

1190) Cf. Edward Biot, Pieclwrches sur Jes mainrs Anciennes des Chinois, 
iVaprh ie Shi-Kini/, Journ, Asiat, Nov., Dec, 1843 ; J. Legge, 
Chinese Classics, vol. iv., pp. 162 intro. and 487-8. 

1197) " Le trace de la ville ou du monument etait precede d'observa- 
tions astronomiques, faites avec un gnomon vertical pour determiner 
la ligne meridienne par la bissection de Tare de cercle compris entre 
les ombres solaires du matin et du soir." J. B. Biot, Advertisement 
to the Tcheou-li, p. 27 ; Le Tcheou-li, K. xlviii., f. 21, transl. Ed. 
Biot., V. ii., p. .554. 

1198) P. Gaubil, Mcmoire sur les ohserrations du i/noiiKin faites a la 
Chine in Additions a la connaissance des temps, 1809, pp. 393 sq. 
Laplace, Ihid, 1811, pp. 429 sq. Tcheou-li, K. ix. f. 17. 

115»9) J. B Biot, Astro. Ind. Chin., p. 320. Teng fung hien in E. 
Honan, is famous by the astronomical tower and gnomon erected 
there by Tchou Kung. Cf. Grosier, i.'hine (3), i. 138 ; De Mailla, 
Hist. Gen. Chine, xiii. 58. 

1200) Trheou-li, K. ix., 16, 17, xlii. 19 ; transl. Biot. v. i., pp. 200- 
202 ; V. ii. pp. .522, 523. 

1201) It is explained in the Shiroh tran of 89 A.D., and in the Shih 
Min;/ of 175 A.D. Cfr. Tai pimj >/ii Ian, K. 4, ff. 4/-. or. 

1202) It is described in a part of the Tehoupei which an astronomical 
statement recorded therein reports to a date within B.C. 572-460. 
Cfr. J. B. Biot, Astron. Ind. Chin. pp. 238, 304 &c. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 279 

1203) Cfr, the remarks of G. Wilkinson's notice in G. Rawlinson's 
Herodotus, vol. ii. p. 330, on tndlnth, step de(jree. 

1204) Diog. Laert. ii. 1. We know that the Greeks have often 
substituted hirrntion to adoption in their claims for things known 

. for several centuries before in other countries. 

120.5) Built for Catana in Sicily, 4"" S. of Rome and therefore 
presenting a big error which was not perceived for a century. Cf. Sal 
Reinach, Phil. Class, i. 275. 

1206) On the sundials, cfr. G. Rayet, Annals de Chiniicct de Phi/siqnc, 
s. v., and vi., p. 52 ; Hermann, I'rirat altcrthiiwer, pp. 122 v. 2, 112 
V. 8; Marquardt, Handbook, v. 2, 271; S. Reinach, Phil. Class., 
ii. 212, i. 275. 



Sect. IV. — On the Clepsi/dra. 

302. — We have no historical statement that the Bak Sings were 
acquainted with the Clepsydra, as they were with the gnomon, when 
they came into China. It may be said, however, that they could not 
without it have made any stellar observations at night with any pre- 
cision, if, as probable, they were able to do.i-'^'' And circumstancial 
evidence from the west originary quarters show that if they had not 
then been made acquainted with it, they could not afterwards have 
received it in the same condition or preliminary stage of development. 
Herodotus (ii. 109) speaks of the Babylonian sundial, gnomon, and 
division of the day into twelve hours, but he does not speak of the 
clepsydra. It is only . Sextus Enipericus of the second century who 
has said that it was with the clepsydra that the Babylonians had 
made their system of duodecimal division of the day.^-*^"* Now we are 
aware that this division along with the reform of the calendar was 
made about or after 25U0 B.C.,i-09 and this shows a respectable 
antiquity for the clepsydra. Some of the poles figured on Chaldean 
cylinders are probably gnomons, but I have not remarked any possible 
representation of the clepsydra on these monuments. The oldest 
known as yet is that which occurs in Egypt in the great Temple of 
Bubastis, at the time of Osor-Khon II., n'n-., 875 B.C. It is a single 
object with an animal shaped to^:).!^!^ 

303. The clepsydra is alluded to in the Annals of the Bamboo 
Books as being neglected in 8'J5-87(> B.C.,^-^^ and in the Trhou-li 
we find it was in charge of special officers.'-^- In the camps it was 



280 OKIGIN OF THE EAKLY 

hung on a pole to be seen from afar. Its mode of construction was 
most simple, and consisted of a single vase with a leaking spout and a 
cover with an opening ; a graduated rod on a floating base emerging 
as a signal was gradually lowering as the water diminished. It could 
not differ much from its v>estern antecedent, and likewise rested 
chiefly on the principle of leaking, i-^^ while the rude time-checks used 
in India, Burma, and among the Malays rest on the principle of 
sinking, which shows their different origin, and the western source of 
the Chinese implement. 

The names for the implement in China was K^it - hu, Kieh-hu, the 
Raised Jar, and Kak-lu, K 'eh-lou, the graduated leak, which names 
singularly enough are much like the Sanskrit nhati, for time piece, 
and the Hindi ghai-i, for clepsydra. ^-i* 

The Rod was graduated with one hundred degrees for the whole 
length of the day, i.e., daylight and night. ^-i^ Such a regularity in 
the division of time, independent of the respective seasons-length of 
day and night is a highly scientific conception, thoroughly Babylonian, 
which the Chinese could not have got from anywhere else, and which 
was long unknown to the Greeks and Romans. 1216 

304. In ancient India a regular division of daytime and a system 
of clepsydra were known, but they rest on different bases. The water- 
clock described in the Vishnu Purdndy^^'^ is just the reverse of the 
Chinese one ; it is in use in other countries such as Java^^is .^nd 
Burma, 1219 where it was carried by Hindu influence, and the 
system is most simple : a smaller basin with a hole at the bottom is 
placed floating on the water in a larger basin, where it fills itself 
gradually and sinks in a fixed time. In the Laws of Manu and the 
Puranas, the day and night are divided into sixty muhiiratas of thirty 
kolas each,i22o which division is obviously difi"erent from the 100 k'eks 
of China. I do not know which were the sub-divisions of the k'ehs,'^^^^ 
but their relation with the duodecimal division employed in Babylonia 
suggests a division by thirds, which would make 25 thirds of a k'eh 
correspond to a twelfth part of a day and night or nycthemeron. It 
has the appearance of a substitution made to a former duodecimal 
system, the original one, (?) which would have been discarded as not 
sufficiently minute for the jDurpose, though otherwise prescrved.1221 The 
centigrade division was the work of the Tchou, but we do not know 
when it was done, nor from which quarters the notion may have come 



CHINESR CmOSATION. 28] 

to them, if it was not an improvement devised by themselves. It has 
been inferred from the fact that the Jyotisham or Vedic calendar and the 
Chinese traditions present an identity of specifications on the duration 
of the longest days, which duration applies to the latitude of Baby- 
lonia, that this specification originated in the latter country, and had 
been carried to India and hence to China. But the inference goes too 
far, as the units of calculation difter, and the two countries appear to 
have received it indipendently.^^^^ 

Notes — 

1207) The astronomical confusion of the first chapter of the Shu 
King is not without throwing doubts on the matter. 

1208) Adv. Math. cap. 21. 

1209) Let us remember that the necessity of a change in the calendar 
was brought about by the accumulated errors of supputation and by 
precession of equinoxes. The sun at the vernal equinox was 
entering Taurus from 4698 to 2540, and^ries from 2,540 to 382 B.C. 
Now the tablets translated in The Astronomy and Astrology of the 
Babylonians, by A. H. Sayce, 1874, show that Aries was the first 
zodiacal sign (cf. p. 237). 

1210) Cf. The Festival Hall of Osor-Khon 11. in the Great Temple of 
Bubastis, by Ed. Naville, 1887-89 ; London, 1892, pp. 6, 8, 9, &c. 
It was called s heb. Brugsch, in Zeits f. ^(/., 1870, 1.56, gives an 
Egyptian word merkhet for horloge in P. Pierret, Voc. Hieroyl. 
226. Another system according to Professor G. Maspero, which 
existed also in ancient Egypt, consisted of several stone-basins 
emptying one another. On a similar system made of bronze basins 
in China, during the T'ang dynasty, cf. G. Schlegel Uranoyra^jhie 
Chinoise, p. 190. 

1211) Tchuh shu Kinien. V. vii. 

1212) Tchou li XXX. 29, 30. It was under the guard of a special 
officer, K'it hu she, who had to keep the water warm in winter that 
it should not be frozen ; hang up the horary vase for certain 
signals of a fixed length of time ; and measure the day and night 
at the equinoxial and solsticial times, as explained in the Sai shu. 
Cf. Stan. Julien, in J. B. Biot, Astronomie Indienne et Chinoise, 
p. 290. Cf. the picture of a clepsydra-vase of the Han dynasty in 
the K'ao ku tu, ix. 26. 

1213) Cf. J. L. Ideler, Ueber der IJrsprung des Thierkreises, p. 16. 
G. Schlegel, Uranograj^hie Chinoise, p. 1!)1, Cf. Also F. A. Seeley, 
Time Keeping in Greece and Rome, pp. 377-397 : Smithsonian Report, 
1889. In later times in China, in order to obtain a greater accuracy 
the number of recipients was increased from two to five. For 
instance in the T'ang dynasty as shown by the figure given by 
Tchu-hi in the Tsi king tu Ed. Biot, Le Tcheou-U, ii. 202, and 
G. Schlegel, Uran. Chin., 190. On great clepsydras of Quinsay or 



282 OKIGIN OF THE EARLY 

Hanrf-tchou, cf. Martini, in H. Yule, Marco Polo, 2, ii. 198 ; of 
Peking in 1272, cf. Bazin, Chine Moderne, p. 26 ; of Canton in 
]317, cf. Chhiese liepository, xx. 430. 

1214) A" ^Wz-A^, 3316-1764 Bas. /vcA-Zott, 7»9-.5l89 Bas. For the 
Indian words, cf. Wilson, Indian Terms, 174, and Edw. Balfour, 
Cyclop, hid., i. 195. 

1215) Cf. Shwoh wen, sub. voc, Lii. P. Gaubil, Hist. Astron. Chin., 
p. 239-40. 

1216) The division in hours was unknown to Homer, and was 
posterior to Anaximander, Pollux enumerates fifteen divisions of 
the day and seven of the night {Onamastiron, i. c. 7). After the 
introduction of the clepsydra by Ctesibius, the Athenians had two 
sorts of hours, the equal or 1,24th of the day of 24 hours, and the 
variable, or ]/12th of the length of the daylight. In Rome the 
day and night were not divided in any regular manner ; even after 
159 B.C., the clocks indicated not the equinoctial liours, but the 
twelfths of the natural day, so that the hours were shorter in winter 
than in summer. Cf. S Reinach, Ph. CI., i., 222, 223, 275, 276. 

1217) Transl. H. H. Wilson, 1840, p. 531. 

1218) G. Schlegel, Uranoyraphie Chinoise, p. 191. 

1219) Shway yve, The Jhirnian, his life and notions, London, 1882, 
vol. ii. 294. In- Burma, it is only at the vernal and autumnal 
equinoxes that the hours of the day and night are equal in time. 
At other times they vary, as formerly in Rome. Cf. Supra n. ^-^^ 
The length of a day and night is complete in sixty naijee (or nari), 
but this division is only used for astrological purposes. 

1220) The Laws of Manu, i. 64, G. Buhler, p. 19. It is only slightly 
different from the astronomical divisions. Cfr. Ebenezer Burgess, 
Translation of the Suri/a Siddluinta, with notes by Whitney, i. 12. 

1221) In the first year Tai tchhi, i.e., 104 B.C., twenty divisions were 
added to the former of 100 of the graduated rod in the Keh-lu, 
making 120 for the night and day. Cfr. Nyai Ti KH in Tai Piny 
j/i'i Ian, K. II. f. 12. 

1222) Cf. Alb. Weber, Ueher die Identitdt dcr Anyahen ron der Dauer 
des liinysten Tayes hei den Chalddern, Chinisen, Indern. Mon. d. Kon. 
Akad d. Wiss, Berlin. 1862; cfr. from the same scholar, Ueber 
(lev Veda Kahnder, namens Jyotisham, pp. 2i^', 30, 107, 108. 
Abhand Kon. Akad. d.Wiss, Berlin, 1862 ; Die redischen Nachrichten 
ran den Naxatra, i. 361-363, ii. 400. J. B. Biot, Astronom. Ind. 
Chin., pp. 292-2i»3. And the Severe Criticisms of Prof. W. D. 
Whitney, J Hot and Weber on the Hindu and Chinese Asterisins, pp. 63-64. 
Prof. Max Miiller in 1860, J. A. S. B., xxix. 200, has claimed that 
the Jyotisha account of the position of the colures fixed the twelfth 
century B C. as the date, not the fourteenth as Colebrook had con- 
cluded. Cf. also Dr. .Tames Burgess, Notes on Hindu Astronomy 
and the History of our Knowledge of it ; J. R. A. S., Oct., 1893, 
pp. 717-761 ; before the Greek influence Indian astronomy consisted 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 283 

of primitive and rough methods of observations, without even a 
knowledge of the 19-year period. Cf. ibid. p. 752;^. 



Sect. V. — Origin of the South-pointing Chariots and Maritime Compass. 

305, The question is more complicated than would appear from 
the suggestion of the Nestor of Sinologists in his not inexhaustive 
enquiry on this subject,!--^ quoted supra, note 159. (1.) The polarity 
of the magnet ; (2) its utilisation for route indicating ; (3) its appli- 
cation for that purpose to chariots (4) and to boats — are different and 
successive questions, probably solved successively in the history of 
progress. It seems that the first notion was very old in the west. 
The Egyptians were acquainted with the magnetic iron which they 
called haa-n-pe, celestial iro n,i224 ajjfi ^i^g expression res-mehit-ba, 
south-north iron, if correctly read, in the inscription of the 
pyramid of Unas (last Pharaoh of the fifth dynasty), would show 
them also acquainted with the artificial isolation of the magnet for 
direction purposes. Plato and Aristotle were acquainted with it, and 
among the Arabs it was to the latter that the discovery was attri- 
buted. 1225 Tiig same notion has also been found in the ancient 
literature of India. 

I am not aware that any trace of a similar knowledge has been 
hitherto disclosed in the Babylonian civilsation, but as our acquaint- 
ance of these matters therein is still fragmentary, we may expect 
that it was common, as so many other things were, to Egypt and 
Babylonia. 

The leaders of the Bak Sings, future civilisers of China, while 
settled yet near the Bakhtyari range, could therefore have become 
acquainted with it, and we might thus understand as a later amplifi- 
cation of a genuine fact the legend reported, not by Szema Tsien, but 
by other compilers, that Hwang ti made use at war of a south-pointing 
chariot. But the evidence in favour of this tradition is romantic and 
nearly nil. 

306. The same incertitude does not concern Tchou Kung, the 
virtual founder of the Tchou dynasty, who appears to have really 



284 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

been acquainted with the polarity of the magnet. He may have learned 
it in the same way as they had learned the other notions of western 
knowledge which we have mentioned in the present work.^^se The 
fifty-sixth chapter of the Shu Kiny, which ought to have contained a 
statement of the fact is lost, and we only know it through an amplified 
version of the fourth century B.C. by Kwei Kuh tze.^^^^ We have 
seen {supra, note 209) that south -pointing chariots could not be made 
in 822-811 B.C., and that it was only in the seventh century that an 
experiment is reported to have been successful. The tradition 
indicates probably nothing more than an improvement in the make 
of the magnet which one could take on oneself when driving, while the 
suggestion of some modern Chinese that the south-pointing article 
was connected with the axles of the chariot is pure childishness. ^228 
It is almost certain that nothing definite had been arrived at in the 
make of special chariots for the purpose, as they are not described in 
the Tchou-li, and subsequent writers, such as the well informed 
Hwai nan tze (T. P., 752, 6) speak only of the magnet. All that 
could be done was to have the magnetic needle fixed in the chariot, 
without being impaired in its movement. 

807. We must come to the first century of our era to hear that a cer- 
tain Tchang Heng had reconstructed one for astronomical purposes. 
Then we arrive to the third century at Lohyang under the reign of Ming- 
ti (227-240 A.D.) of the Wei dynasty,where it being said that the ancients 
never had any south-pointing chariots, Ma-Kiun, the mechanician 
made the attempt and was at last successful in making one.i^-s The 
Shi Wang Ki of the fifth century, describing the system says that 
on the top of the chariot was placed a Avooden figure of a sien-jin 
holding a trusty flag ; inside of the chariot was the pointing to the 
south (cf. T. P., 775, 1*'.) 

A century later the same success does seem to have partly rewarded 
the efforts of Hiai-fei in 342, and of Hu-sheng, 394 A.D., to make 
similar chariots for Shih-hu, fourth king (335-349 A.D.) of the After 
TcHAo, a small Tartar dynasty of North China, and for Yao-hing, 
894-415, second king of the Hou Tsm. 

When the first of these chariots came into the possession of Wu Ti 
of the Liu Sung dynasty (420 A.D.), it was claimed that these Jung- 
Tek, otherwise Tartars, who had made it had not worked well, and 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 285 

that often they did not indicate the true southJ^so This damaging 
report was probably prompted by the wounded amour propre of the 
Chinese, when seeing all the great things which these Tartars had 
made. Shih-hu, in 342, had rebuilt the city, already magnificent, of YeJi, 
(modern Lin-tchang in Tchang-teh fu of North Honan). On the 
Mimi-hoh tch'i, or Pond of the Cackling Crane, a special boat with a 
south-pointing magnet (Tchi nan tchou) was built on his commands in 
that year, and this may be taken as the Jirst instance of the maritiwc 
compass. It is mentioned in the Tsin Knng Koh Ki of the fourth 
century. 1231 i do not know when this mere toy was improved and 
adopted for practical navigation ; it remained undoubtedly slumbering 
for centuries, as the oldest mention of the maritime compass (as shown 
by Dr. J. Edkins, Trans. Asiat. Soc. Japan, Dec, 1880, viii. 475), 
dates only of 1122 A.D., on board of the ship which starting from 
Ning-po carried the Chinese ambassador to Corea. 

308. In 1876, Mr. William Chappell,' iVafure, June 15, has tried to 
show that we owe the appearance of the compass in Europe in the twelfth 
century to independent discovery, and not to importation from China. 
Herr A. Schiich, Die Saj/e von Kompass in China, 1891, Natur, Halle, 
51, 606-8; 52, 613, 5, and Ausdand, 1892, 4-10, has collected 
historical data to show that it has been received by the Arabs from 
Europe, and not by Europe from the Arabs. However, the Arabs 
who were then, long before and afterwards, frequenting the Chinese 
ports must have been blind and deaf if they did not hear something 
of this novelty. And although a positive link proven by a definitive 
fact is missing between the Chinese and Arab implement, the corre- 
sponding dates and the known intercourse are rather too much for an 
independent invention. 

r 

Notes. — 

1223) Chin. Class, iii. 536-7. Cf. also J. Klaproth, Lettre sur Vinven- 
tion tie la Boussole, 1834. Ed. Biot, Note sur la direction de 
V Aiguille Aimantee en Chine. C. R. Acad Scienc 1844, t. xix. 

1224) According to T. Deveria, Le Fer et VAimant dans VAncienne 
Ef/ijpte, 1870. 

1225) Cf. Reinaud, Introd., Geoijraphie d'Aboidfeda, 1848, p. ciii. 

1226) Cf. Notes 149-153, 346, and the text corresponding. 

1227) T.P., 775, 1 v. 



286 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

1228) Cf. the negative note of Dr. J. Chalmers, China and the 
Magnetic Compass: China Eeview, 1891, xix. 52-54. 

1229) Cf. Fu-tze. T. P., 752, 7. 

1230) Cf. Tch'en Yoh, Sunrj Shu. Shih-hu, Yeh tchwu/ Ki. T P., 
752, 2, 2 V. The Ku yii tu, lUustrations of Ancient Jades by Tchu 
Teh-jun, 1341 (re-published 1603), in two books, gives, i. 2, a 
picture of a little figure in jade on its pivot, from a south-pointing 
chariot, which has been reproduced in the San tsai tu huij cyclo- 
paedia of 1609, and elsewhere, and was sixteen inches high. The 
right arm extended in front is supposed to have always indicated 
the south from a loadstone concealed inside. In the oldest south - 
pointing chariots the indicator was a hand hanging inside of the 
car ; the little figure outside was an improvement of the fifth 
century. 

1231) Cf. T. P., 769, 1 V ; 197, 4 ; 973, 3. 



Sect. VI. — Foreign Historical Sources of Ancient Chinese Astronomy. 

30!'. When the Bak Sings arrived in China some of the native 
populations had already a rough sort of astronomy. Several of them, 
star-gazing, had noticed in course of years the recurrence at regular 
times of the same celestial bodies in the starry heavens ;i232 and with 
reference to sowing and harvest times they had paid a peculiar atten- 
tion to the position of Ursa^Iajor.^^^^ When he took possession 
of the supreme authority of the East of China the famous 
Kao Yawf Tchnen hiuh, in his thirteenth year {i.e., r. 2213 B.C.), 
is said to have made some calendaric calculations and delinea- 
tions of heavenly bodies^-^^ His successor Ti huh Kao-sin (2147- 
2076 B.C.), with his foreign minister, Tchnnfi-li,^^^'^ was able to define 
the zodiacal stars and exhibit their times to the people. i23« Szema 
Ts'ien, who has preserved^ss? a bare list of the celebrated astrologers of 
olden times, begins with the name of Tchung-li, and passes to Ri and 
Ho of the time of Yao, spoken of in the Sku Kin;/. The most famous 
afterwards was Knn-r/u, who arrived with his tribe by the Kukunor 
route, introducing the art of bronze about 1741 B.C. Under the 
reign of Tai Mou, of the Shang dynasty, who is said to have received 
numerous envoys from foreign parts, flourished Wujiien, a foreigner, 
who made the first catalogu'; of the stars, and in c 1553 B.C. 



^ 



CHINES* CIVILISATION. 287 

organised the state worship of the hills and rivers. ^-^^ During the 
TcHou dynasty, at the outset, under Wu Wang, lived She i/h, who was 
Ta she, or great historiographer. i-^a 

310. Tch'antj-huu(i, who has also made himself famous in astron- 
omy, was a ta-fu, or great officer, in the time of Ling Wang (571-544 
B.C.) Later on flourished Tze Wei, in the state of Sung, and Pi 
Tsao in the state of Tcheng, whom we have already met as a well 
known sacrificer to the foreign Kitchen god in 533 B.C.1240 j^ ^j^g 
principality of T'si, Kan Kumj, who lived in the time of the Con- 
tending States, about 350 B.C., wrote a work called Tien iven sin;/ 
tchen, Divination by the starry signs of the sky, in eight books. In 
the kingdom of T'su lived T'ang Mei, and in that of Tchad, Yn Kao, 
after 400 B.C. In that of Wei about the same date lived Shih Shhi 
who wrote the Tien Wen, or Signs of the Sky, in eight booksi24i The 
Tie7i wen sing tchen and Tien wen, of Kan and Shih, are said to have be- 
come the Sinff King, The Book of Stars, that was edited under the Han 
dynasty, i-'i'-^ and recast under the T'ang dynasty, ^^^s when Hindus, 
Greeks, Romans, Persians, Mahommedans had furthermore contri- 
buted to enrich the Chinese stock of notions of astronomy. 

311. The Annals of the Tsin dynasty (265-419 B.C.) section of 
astrology, say that the astronomical works of the Ta she-ling, or great 
astrologer, Tch'en-tch'oh and others, of Kan and Shih, and of Wu- 
hien, altogether three schools, had mapped out the stars, in a total of 
283 kwan or constellations including 1464 stars. 1244 The list of fixed 
stars published by Mr. A. Wylie, the translator of Herschell, contains 
2872 fixed stars, of which 1398 only were Chinese. i-^* In Dr. Gustave 
Schlegel's Uranographie Chinoise, 755 different names of stars are 
given. 1-4*' 

Notes — 

1232) Dr. Gustav Schlegel, in his Uranogra/i/iie Chinoise, 1875, 929 
pp., has collected a considerable mass of evidence on the subject. 
But he thinks that it cannot be explained but by an antiquity of 
18000 years,. which I think unnecessary, Cf. below, §^ 316-320. 

] 233) This is shown by the teaching of Shun (who was a native 
prince) in substitution to the teaching of Yao, which it seems had 
been misunderstood in the transmission, as explained in the follow- 
ing note. 

1284) Tchuh shu Kinienyl., iii. In the Literary Catalogue of the 



288 ORIGIN OF THE EAKLY 

first Han dynasty, Tsieji Han shu, kiv. 30, section of calendar, 
Lih-pu, several works bear titles concerning that early period. 
Hwang-ti ini kia lih, Hwang-ti's five schools' calendar, in 33 kiv. 
The earliest astronomical statements in Chinese legends and tradi- 
tions are most interesting to notice here for their intrinsic value, 
and also because of the numerous misgivings which are fancied 
about them. I. — Szema Tsien, She Ki, i. 4, tells us that " Hwang- 
ti had acquired a valuable tripod, and that he calculated the lists 
of the solar movements." And at xxviii 82, he reports a legend 
told in 112 B.C., from which it appears that Hwang-ti utilised the 
astrological slips of the tripod {i.e., contained in it as in ancient 
west) and calculated as said before ; the legend says also that 
Hwang-ti remarked that after about twenty years the winter solstice 
was coming again on the first day of the month, and thus calcu- 
lated the calendar for twenty times that period, or 380 years. The 
last part of the legend is almost certainly spurious as the 19-year 
cycle appeared only in 655 B.C. (see add. n. -47), and the seven 
intercalary months which it requires meanwhile were not made, 
otherwise than in a haphazard fashion, as shown by J. Chalmers, 
Astronomy of the Ancient Chinese. II. — Tchuan-hiiih is said in the 
Bamboo Annals to have made a calendar with figures (of the 
heavenly bodies ?). The text gives only lik siang, which might be 
translated somewhat differently, but as the Shu King in the canon 
of Yao has the same words followed of sun, moon, planets, and 
constellations ; their meaning is allowed to be as we have tran- 
slated. The Imperial Library in B.C. 7 contained a calendar of 
Tchuan-hiiih in twenty-one books, and a work under the same 
name on the Five Stars or planets in fourteen books, where probably 
,the views commonly attributed to him had been embodied (cf . Tsien 
Han shu, kiv. 30, fol. 31). Tradition also wanted him to have first 
made the sky round while H^vang-ti had made it a vault (cf. Liu 
she Lih tchang wan of the Han period, T. P., ii. 8 v.) It was soon in- 
ferred from it that he had actually made an astronomical instrument 
on that principle. III. — In the first chapter of the Shu King, Yao 
instructs his astronomers that a year being complete on the 366th 
day, they should have to use intercalary months to make the seasons 
right and the year exact. There is no question here of a bissextile 
year, although Norman Lockyer, in his Origin of the Year, has 

> shown that the year length of 365J days was known in ancient 
^ Egypt 2500 B.C. ; but the migration of the Bak tribes took place 
before the Chaldean reform of calendar of about 2243 B.C.(?) It is 
ki the same chapter of the Book of History that are given the 
famous instructions of Yao, to four astronomers for observing the 
four leading stars of the seasons, which would be roughly right, 
instead of being incomprehensible, had not an inversion crept 
between the characters for west and east as shown by the actual 
and unmistakable derivations of the four symbols of the cardinal 

^ points from those of the Chaldco-Elamite script (T. de L., The 
Loan (f Chaldeo-Klamite Culture to Early China, 1891, §§ 20-30; 
and The Oldest Book of the Chinese, 1892, §§ 185-8. IV. — It appears 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 289 

that this astronomical method did not work well, as in the 
following chapter of the Shu Kiwi, we see that Shun, as soon as he 
assumed the supreme authority, provided his suLjects with another 
and more simple process — " He fixed on the siun-ki, or pearly 
revolving (the first four stars), and the y'l'th heng or gemmy balance __ 
(the three stars of the tail of Ursa Mjijor), to be the seven con- — 
trollers (of the seasons)." It is the same idea suggested by nature 
which caused the Greeks to call this constellation he like. This use 
of these stars for calendaric indicators was said to have been 
always known ; it was described at length in the fourth century B.C. 
by Hoh Kwan-tze ; and about 190 B.C. the old Fuh sheng, after 
the literary persecution, had still preserved the notion that the four *■ 
words of the text in question were referring to the north pole. But 
after 150 B.C., with Kung-'an Kwoh, another view began to prevail; 
the oldest explanation was not grand enough, and it was stated that 
these words were the description of a jewelled astronomical instru- 
ment, which in the later commentators has become an armillary 
sphere made of pearls with a transverse tube of jade ! The astron- 
omical fact that Draco nis was yet pole-star at the time of Shun, just - 
above the so-called balance, fully justifies the names he gave to 
these stars, and the whole thing shows, in our opinion, that this 
teaching of Shun was based upon native astronomical folk lore. 

1235) Tchung_-.li, anciently Tung-li, for Tungri — Tengri, heaven, 
in Turkish languages, which fact may suggest that he was a 
foreigner, and probably a^_Turk. Among the Turko-Tartars the "^ 
following star names appear to have been anciently known : — 

(1) the North_.Star, Altin Kazuk, or golden pole or stake, in Uigur, 
temir Kazuk, or iron pole or stake, in Djagatai. (2) In Ursa J^inor, ^^ 
two stars called Kvk-h^at and Ak-bozat, or White and Blue Horses. 
(3) Three stars in the same constellation called Arkan-jolduz, or 
Rope Stars. (4) Jeti-karakchi = the Seven Robbers. (5) Sekiz- 
ioldiiz^^the eight stars on the eastern horizon of the steppes. There 
is the unlucky star, zejan-Jolduz=Scovipio Star, called in central 
Asia and Persia Kerivankush, the grave-digger of caravans, because as 
long as the caravans observe its rising with Orion in the morning, 
robbers and death follow the stations. (6) The Morning Star. ^ 
(7) The Seven Stars, i.e., the Pleiades. (8) The Milky way, called 
the Bird's Path. Cf. H. Vambery, Die Primitive Cultur des Tiirko- 
Tatarischen Volkes, 1879, pp. 154-6. Considering that Turkish 
tribes formed part of the Pre-Chinese population of North China, 
the almost complete absence of connection between their astron- 
omical folk-lore and that of the Pre-Chinese shows that the astron- 
omical knowledge of the latter was small, regional, and various. 
On names of stars introduced from the ancient west cf. add. 28. 

1236) lA Ki, XX. 19. Sacred Books of the East, xxviii. 208. 

1237) SheKi, Tien Kwan shu, xxvii. 40, 41. 

1238) Supra sect. 98, 91, note 340, and add, 342. Tchuh shuh ki nien, 
IV., ix. 11 Wu-hien was a man of the west. His country was 
called Fuk-mok ; it was situated in the N.W. of the Lop-nor, near the 




290 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

T'ien-shan, therefore in Karashar. Cf. Shut Kiwi. Si yii tchi, 
T. P. Y. L., 50, 6. His name, anciently Mukan, Mogan, is per- 
haps suggestive of an ultimate origin farther in the west. It 
reminds me of Mahan in Takla Makan, the region east of Yarkand, 
» and of the plain and town of Mogan near the Caspiap (on which cf. 
Ed. Bretschneider, Med. Iks., i, 294 ; Barbier de Meynard, Diction- 
naire Historique de la Perse, 548 ; H. Cordier, Odoric de Pordenone, 
36. 

1239) Khang hi tze tien, s. v. yh. 9 + 5, fol. 19. 

1240) Siqjra, sect. 188 and note 658. 

1141) It will be remarked that these various astronomers lived in the 
east, and at the period of astrological influence imported in Shan- 
tung by the mariners of the Erythrcean Sea who were acquainted 
with the astronomical peculiarities of the southern hemisphere. The 
latter circumstance coupled with the double sowing and double 
harvest times for some plantations has introduced a good deal of 
confusion in the astrological folklore of China. 

1242) The section of T'ien wen or astrology in the Han Catalogue 
includes 445 sections forming 21 works, and that on calendar 18 
works, forming 606 sections. 

1243) A. Wylie, Notes on Chinese Literature, p. 93, has the following 
information on this work : " Old catalogues mention a Book of the 
Stars, with the title or Sing King, written during the Han, by Kan 
Hung and Shih Shen. An ancient work with the same title is still 
extant ; some have thought it to be the same, but it has been con- 
cluded on critical evidence that it cannot be older than the T'ang 
dynasty." 

1244) Tsin shu, Tien Wen tchi. In She Ri, kiv. 27, fol. 16. 

1245) In Doolittle's Vocabulary and Handbook, 1872, vol. ii., 
p. 617-632. 

1246) UranograpJiie Chinoise, 1875, p. 86. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 291 



CHAPTER IX.— MEETING OBJECTIONS. 



I. — Southern Origin. 

312. So far as I am aware four obj^ections of a general character 
have to be met by my disclosures of an early importation of West- 
Asiatic culture in China. 

The first objection in date was made by two reviewers of my book on 
The Langnaf/es of China before the Chinese, in 1888 (prized in 1889 by the 
Academie des Inscriptions). An anonymous critic wondered why I 
had not left the native populations of China alone {sic), as these 
miserable tribes did not deserve to be studied, and another advocated 
the suggestion that the Chinese people ought to have come from the 
south, even from the Malacca peninsula and not from the north west. 
Now let us remark that he mixed the two questions of population 
and civilisation, which are different in the case. 

When the west civilised Bak families under the leadership of 
Hwang-ti arrived in the Flowery Land they found the country 
inhabited by tribes of several races, originating from the south and from 
the north ; and the present Chinese nation has come out under the 
activity of these civilisers and of later conquerors from the gradual 
fusion of these various ethnical elements. The formation has taken 
3500 years to be completed. 

II. — Self Growth and Berelopment. 

313. Another objection consists in the hypothesis, once cherished 
by theoricians, that the civilisation of the Middle Kingdom was the 



292 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

result of a self -growth, slowly evolved from the limbos of savagery. 
This view could be put forward, but when Chinese antiquity had not 
\ yet been the object of a systematical enquiry which it entirely dis- 
proves, as the Chinese themselves attribute the establishment of most 
items of their civilisation to the foreign founders of their nation 
arrived from the west. The last attempt^^^^ at finding a native origin 
for the Chinese written characters, in neglecting several conditions of 
the problem, such as a possible foreign origin, has proved to be a com- 
plete failure, as shown by the remarks and criticisms of several 
scholars. The author has attempted to show a hieroglyphical and 
therefore an independent origin for all the written characters of China. 
He has neglected the conditions of preservation of these characters, 
the political state of the country which led to the creation of new 
pictorial characters in some of the illiterate circuits, and the natural 
increase of all systems of writing belonging to the semi-ideographic 
semi-phonetic stage, as that imported by Hwang-ti and his people. 
Pictorial characters of new make would not appear as they do on coins 
of the fourth century B.C. if it was not so. We may refer for this to 
our remarks supra § 100. 

314. For the sake of argument let us for a moment neglect this 
pictorial evidence. It cannot be doubted that identical hints rather 
often lead to developments and results somewhat identical. The 
question therefore is to know wherefrom the hint has come. It may 
be from inner or outer nature, such for instance as the awe of spirits 
in the one case, and a veneration for the polestar on the other, or it 
may be a communication from another nation. In the latter circum- 
stance, when the similarity turns out on things which are not what 
they are by necessity of nature, and might as well be altogether 
different, as far as this necessity is concerned, it must be a coincidence 
or an importation. Historical circumstances and physical possibilities 
must be surveyed to make sure of the importation, and in the absence 
of historical records, numerous similarities of the kind justifying and 
supporting one the other, must be established for the same object. In 
the long array of items of culture collected in the present work, with 
the shortcomings of the author and the difficulties of all pioneering 
investigations, it is unavoidable that within long series of finally 
established instances there may be some misapprehensions, premature 



CHINESK CIVILISATION. 293 

identifications, suggestive of further researches, which shall only 
disprove or confirm them individually. 

Note — 

1247) Rev. E. Faber, Prehistorir (lilna : J. Ch. Br. R. A. S., xxiv., 
1890, and the refutations by Dr. J. Edkins and others, Ihid, p. 211, 
sq., by Prof. G. Schlegel, T'oun;/ Pao, 1891, ii. 105-110; cf. also 
T. de L., The Loan of Chaldeo-Elaiiiite culture to China, note 35. 
Dr. Faber does not seem to have been acquainted with my papers 
on the subject. 

Ill . — Monosyllabic Theo ri/. 

315. The most curious objection is undoubtedly that which was 
made to me by Prof. J. Legge, of Oxford, at the International Congress 
of Orientalists of 1892, here in London. The Nestor of Sinologists 
said that although he had heard of my works on the Babylonian 
sources of the early Chinese civilisation, he did not look at any of them 
because, as he learned from Prof. Sayce, the Akkadian language is 
polysyllabic, while that of the Chinese is monosyllabic, therefore 
their civilisation must be older than that of the Akkadians, instead of 
the reverse {sic). 

My answer to this is twofold. Firstly, the linguistic question has 
nothing to do in the matter ; secondly, I have never held that Akkadian 
was ancestor of the Chinese, since my contention is that the two 
languages are related by common descent from a remote stock, ^^48 
and not so to speak in the relation of mother to daughter.^^^s 

Notes — 

1248) Cf. my remarks on this subject in The Oldest Book of the 
Chinese, 1898, i. 106-8. 

1249) The latter view is nearly that of the Rev. C.J. Ball, in his papers 
on the New Accadian, 1890, to which I have demurred. In my 
opinion we do not know enough of the old forms of the Chinese 
words to make many safe comparisons, inasmuch as the monosyllabic 
words of a limited phonetism as that of the Chinese (where a single 
sound has as many as 1200 different meanings), can be compared 
with any monosyllables of any language as done by John Webb 
(1669), Daniel Webb (1787), Julius Klaproth (1811), M. Hyde 
Clark, Protohistoric Couiparative Philuhy/t/, 1875 ; M. R. P. Grey 
Comparative Philolom/ of the Old and New Worlds in relation to 
Archaic speech, 1898, &c. On the other hand we are aware that 
many present words monosyllabic in Chinese are crippled forms of 



294 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

former polysyllables. Cf. T. cle L., Le Non-Monosyllahisme du 
Chinois Antique, I'ecarfc centre les langues ecrite et parlee d'aujourd- 
'hui et I'histoire de la langue ecrite, 1889 ; Raoul de la Grasserie, 
Des Recherches Eecentes de la Linciuistique relatives ait.v lamjues de 
VExtrewe Orient, principalement d'apres les travaux de M. Terrien 
de Lacouperie, 1891 ; C. de Harlez, Existe-t-il des lantfues purement 
Monosi/llalnques? 1893; in his latest paper The Accadian Affinities of 
the Chinese, 1893, Mr. C. J. Ball, has admitted the neo-monosylla- 
bism of the Chinese. Cf. also T. de L., Tibet, Philolo;/y in Eucyclo- 
pccdia Britannica, 1888, xxiii, 347-8. 



IV. — Astrot/nosie. 

316. Some of the Pre-Chinese tribes appear to have had a taste 
for star-gazing, and the result, as referred to previously, has been a 
traditional amount of astronomical lore in connection with their 
customs and agricultural pursuits. The immigration of the Chinese 
with a stellar lore of their own, the introduction of new plants, and 
the successive importation of further astrological notions in the course 
of centuries, have made the symbolism derived from the stars in 
China most complicated. This symbolism looked upon as a whole 
forms the fourth objection which we shall now meet. It is the only 
theory which has been developed with any show of serious arguments. 

The claim of the present work goes against that theory put forth 
with great erudition and ingenuity some nineteen years ago by 
Dr. G. Schlegel in his Uranographie Chi^ioiseA^^^ The contention of 
the learned author was and is that 19,000 years ago astronomy was 
already cultivated in China, and that traces of that astronomy exist in 
the symbolical names given to asterisms in the literature, and can be 
recognised in alleged relations between them and popular customs. 
The peculiar and multiple attributions of symbolism to the same 
stars and identical attributions to different stars are better explained 
in our view by the variety of foreign sources, north and south, which 
have successively contributed to the formation and increase of the 
astronomy of the Chinese — joined to their own observations — than by 
a theoretical array of thousands of years, unsupported by a tithe of 
evidence from any other source, and which nothing justifies. Let us 
remember here that according to the astronomer, John Reeves, in his 
appendix to Morrison's Dictionary, I. ii. 1063 : " To our surprise we 
find that the Chinese know little or nothing about astronomical 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 296 

science." It consists chiefly of a mass of facts and notions ill-digested 
and ill-understood until they received the help of the Hindus and 
Mohammedans to put them into some sort of shape. And as to the 
accordance claimed by Dr. Schlegel of the names of asterisks and 
constellations with the natural history, ethnography, and customs of 
China, no one acquainted with the remarkable cleverness of the Chinese 
writers at combining information and finding allusions to anything 
in everything, i^^i unthought of before their own combinations, will 
attribute any value to the alleged accordance as a traditional evidence 
of 16 or 18,000 years standing. 

317. Prof. G. Schlegel (p. 498) avers that the Chinese have 
reached China by the north west, between the 30th and 27th century 
B.C., and that a striking agreement exists between the names of 
western constellations and those of Chinese asterisms,^"^ whose in- 
vention which should be attributed to the Pre- Chinese races, ^^^s and 
which would denote a state of uncivilisation, of the stone age, like 
among savages of the present day,!^^* would have wandered from east 
to west. We think it has been the reverse, and that the resemblances, 
like most of the imported notions enumerated in the present work, 
have all the appearances of a clumsy learning of western notions. As 
recognised by the learned author himself, peoples without writing 
have a short memory. Now we cannot admit, as a human possibility, 
that symbols fancied in the relative position of some stars could, 
without written records to keep up the interpretation, have had a 
sufficient hold on uncivilised minds to last unaltered for twelve 
thousand years, when the alleged symbolism had long ceased to exist 
as a result of the precession of equinoxes. Moreover the etymology 
of the Chinese characters, first written some 4500 years ago and trans- 
mitted by tradition, through which most of the supposed astronomical 
symbolism is examined, is most difficult to ascertain, and although we 
may often recognise the component parts of a symbol, we are by no 
means sure of their individual meaning, still less of their symbolism. 
The Chinese themselves vary on their interpretations, which are often 
biassed by the current ideas of the time of the exegete, and we have 
seldom the possibility of correcting them, inasmuch as we arc ourselves 
exposed to prejudices of the same kind. Furthermore the difficulty is 
enhanced by the multiplicity of names, ^-*^ sometimes six or eight, 
amongst which the most suitable are unavoidably selected for a theory 



/ 



/ 



296 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

in view, while another theory could select as well and with the same 
success suitable names among the others. 

318. We cannot but find, notwithstanding the remarkable amount 
of ingenuity and erudition displayed by the author of the Urano<irapliie 
C'hinoise, that such a symbolism forms a basis by far too slender and 
utterly inadequate for the huge construction made upon it beyond five 
thousand years ago. Should the theory be true there would not be a 
gap of some twelve thousand years of dead silence, between the sup- 
posed symbohsms of 17,000 and 3000 years B.C.^^ss We are utterly 
convinced that adequate explanations, more in accordance with his- 
torical traditions, can be found for the remote cases alleged in the 
work : and as to those of later date which might resist criticism 
at close quarters, it is easier to understand some of them as introduced 
from older centres of culture where writing was known several 
thousand years earlier, than to suppose their preservation without 
writing among savages. 

319. All the foregoing reasons are not however sufficient to dis- 
prove all the suggestions put forward in support of his views by so great 
a scholar as my friend Dr. Schlegel. Some cases may have been 
explained away by the progress of research since the publication of his 
work. 12'" Others may have resulted from misconceptions^^ss a^jj 
overstretching the symbolism. ^^sa But my readers will agree with me 
that there must be some other cause, more general in character which 
pervades the whole edifice. It is this cause which we have yet to de- 
cribe. The learned author of the Uranof/raphie Chinoise has not taken the 
usual means to make safe his basis before building his monument ; 
he has not made any text-critik of his documents, nor has even classi- 
fied them chronologically. 1260 Should he have taken this preliminary 
step, he could not have failed to be struck by the fact that the names 
from which he was able to derive his inferences of oldest antiquity are 
not the oldest denominations that they ought to be. For the readers of 
the present work there is nothing surprising in that. Let them 
remember the numerous items of western astrological-astronomy 
introduced in North China by the trading mariners of the Erythraean 
Sea, who frequented the emporia of Shantung during three centuries, 
675-375 B.C., and then removed gradually their stations to the south. 
Denominations of stars accompanied the names of months, zodiac and 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 297 

cycles (distinct from those of early times) for astrological purposes, 
which they imported among the Chinese. And let them remember 
also, that about 400 B.C., if not before, through some circumstances 
historically unexplained, although they are facts, they changed their 
sea route and henceforth passed south of Sumatra-Java, therefore 
south of the equator, where the seasons are the reverse of ihose of the 
north, and where, also, the stars had. and have just the reverse of 
their usual symbolism in the north. This southern symbolism which 
they communicated to the Chinese has naturally thrown into the 
astrognosie of the latter some disturbing notions unaccountable but by 
the historical circumstances of their introduction in North China, or 
by the stupendous hypothesis of the Vranographie Chinoise, which, 
written when the aforesaid circumstances were yet undiscovered, 
has thus become unnecessary. History within its limited period 
is sufficient to explain the whole thing. 

320. Dr. G. Schlegel says in his last answer that "the disbelievers 
in Chinese antiquity will firstly have to prove by undeniable astron- 
omical testimony that Elam and Chaldea have an older history than 
China, which is impossible, the oldest astronomical observation in the 
world being the eclipse of the sun in B.C. 7 May, 2165." Let us first 
remark that in his paper on this eclipse with Dr. Kuhnert, he gives an 
alternative date of B.C. 12 May, 1904, which alone fits the lengths of 
reigns in Chinese history. But this is a secondary point. The learned 
author has forgotten that according to Berosus, the astronomical ob- 
servations sent by Kallisthenes from Babylon to Aristotle in B.C. 331 
reached back to B.C. 2243 (Pliny N. H. vii. ,57). But this is nothing 
compared to the evidence put forward by the well known astronomer, 
Prof. Norman Lockyer, in his recent work on The Daivn of Astron- 
omy,^^^' about astronomical observations in the sixth and fifth 
milleniums B.C. Dr. Schlegel (p. 763, 770) gives the date of 2852 
for Fuhi, the fabulous inventor of the Chinese writing. At the 
Academic des Inscriptions, on the 8th and 23th September, 1893, 
Prof. J. Oppert gave the translation of an inscription of Bingani-sar- 
iris, a Semitic King of Nippur, older than 4000 years B.C., and since 
then Mr. Joachim Menant, has read in the same place a paper on 
three Chaldean rulers older than 4000 B.C.. such as Sangani, Sarluti, 
Bingani Sarluti. These answers are conclusive. They are strengthened 
moreover by the historical circumstances of foreign sources for the 



298 ORI&IN OF THE EARLY 

Chinese astronomy {siiprd 809). Besides the notions imported from 
the west by Hwang-ti and his followers, we have learned that the first 
catalogue of the stars was made by Wu-hien, a man from the west, 
who had come from or through Karashar, and that the two astron- 
omical works by Kan Kung and Shih Shen which form the substratum 
of the Book of Stars, Sinn King, were written in the north east of 
China, after that the trading mariners of the Erythroean Sea had there 
spread their astrologico-astronomical notions for three centuries. 

Notes — 

2050) Cf. supra, § 309, and note 1234, also note 1255, and the 
references. About double crops, Wells Williams, Middle Kingdom, 
revised edition, 1883, ii. 5, says : " Grain is not sown broadcast, 
and this facilitates hoeing and weeding the fields as they require. 
Two crops are planted, one of which ripens after the other ; maize 
and pulse, millet and sesamum, or sorghum and squash, are thus 
grown together." 

1251) Uranographie Chhioise, ou Preuves directes que I'astronomie 
primitive est originaire de la Chine, et qu'elle a ete empruntee paries 
anciens peuples occidentaux a la sphere Chinoise. La Haye, 1875, 
929 pp. and atlas. Reponse aux critiques de I'Uranographie Chinoise, 

. 23 pp., 1880. China or Flaw, in T'ung Pao, Sept., 1891, p. 243-5 ; 
the latter is intended to be an answer to a criticism of mine in From 
Ancient Chaldea and Flam to earlij China : B. and 0. R. v. 34, 84 ; 
the sole remark to be noticed is that the greater facility for communi- 
cations between the west and the east was equal between the east 
and the west. 

1252) The remains of ancient Chinese literature have been over- 
, hauled unceasingly during twenty centuries or more, in more or less 

indiflerent and clever manner, most generally indifferent, and it has 

* now become an almost Herculean task to get through the whole 
f fabric and get rid of the inaccurate interpretations which have been 

• piled up over them by the native commentators. 

1253) Uranographie, 728, 738, &c., 655-712. 

1254) T'ung Pao, iv. 493. Uranographie, 766. 

1255) Curiously enough when it became necessary to distinguish 
every star by a name, some of the denominations possessed only 
by a central star were distributed around it. For instance with 
Regulus, Cassiopee, &c. ; Sirius, the Dog Star, the Bow Star of the 
Chaldeans has near it a Bow Star, and a Chacal Star in the Chinese 
uranosphere. Cf. also below add. 28, and on the lateness of the 
conception of the four Animal Quadrants of the Sky, add. 392. 

1256) i.e. Between 14,671 and 2700 B.C., cf. O.C, 498. 

1257) The argument derived from the astronomical statement of Yao 
about the most prominent stars that were to be observed for each 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 299 

of the four seasons comes to nought, and is explained away by the 
shifting of attribution between the symbols of the cardinal points 
which occurred during the migration of the Bak families, as shown c 
by their obvious derivation from the older Chaldeo-Elamite symbols 
and the discrepancies in other legendary accounts. The compiler of 
the chapter of the Shu Kiiuj which is not a contemporary document, 
has undoubtedly mistaken the information when expanding the 
brief original statement. Cf. on the subject : T. de L., Farhj 
History, 1880, p. 29 ; The Shifted Cardinal Points, from FAam to 
Karlij Cliina : Jan., 1888; Tlie Loan of Chaldeo-FAamite Culture to 
Earhj China, 1892, p. 9-14 ; The Shiftinf/ of the Names and Symbols 
of the points of spare fr<))ii Chaldea to China, as evidence of the 
South-West Asiatic Origin of Early Chinese Civilisation : London 
and China Telegraph, Sept. 13, 1892; The Oldest Book of the Chinese 
1893, vol. i., p. 111-4. 

1258) The star Deneb, alpha Cygni, was Polestar, some 17,500 years 
ago, and some traces of so important a fact should be found in the 
Astroi/nosie Indestructible, if the alleged 18,000 years of Chinese 
astronomy were based on evidence and not on misconceptions. But --^ 
there is nothing. Deneb is one of eight stars forming what is called 
a 3"zc?i tsiii, or Heaven's Ford, probably because the Milky Way 
branches there in two lines (which continue running in parallel to 
the south west). Professor G. Schlegel, however, thinks (p. 208) 
that he has found a tradition of 16,000 years of age in the following 
statement of Ko-hung, an alchemist of our fourth century: — " The 
Heaven's River [i.e., the Milky Way) coming from the north pole 
separates into two branches, reaching to the south pole ; one branch 

. goes by the Nan tou (\ Sagittarii on the east), and the other goes by 
the Tuwj tsin (Gemini on the west)." As I have given in brackets 
the relative positions of the asterisms indicated, which both are on 
the ecliptic, at 12 h. R.A., one from the other, the two branches in 
question cannot be the two lines branched off in Cygnus, as inad- 
vertently supposed in the Urano;iraphie Chinoise, and therefore Deneb 
or its region has nothing to do in the affair. Ko-hung was speaking 
of what he could himself see in the heavens, and we may be sure 
that he knew nothing of the North Pole of 16,000 years before his 
time. A glance at the stellar chart shows that the Milky Way has 
a sort of head, in the north of Cepheus, between the stars 7 and 
fi Alphirk ; and this is its nearest point to the North Pole which 
was then nearer to the present Pole Star than of Kokhab, the former 
one (1000 B.C.). Ko-hung was certainly speaking of the central 
point, equidistant from Sagittarius and the Gemini, which would 
not have been the case with Deneb. Therefore we may be satisfied 
that there is no evidence there of any antiquity for the Chinese 
astronomy. 

Rastaban, 7 Draconis, as a Pole Star 13,000 years ago has left -; 
no record in the Chinese astronomy. This is what we expected. 
On the other hand Shuban, Chinese Si fan, a Draconis, the Pole ^ 
Star of 30C]0 B.C. is well described as such. It was called in early '"' 



300 



ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 



Chaldea, the Great God of Heavens, the yoke or pivot of the 
heavens (Sayce, Anc. Iiflig. Bab., 291), all denominations which 
have been received and preserved in the Chinese nomenclature 
{Uranor/raphie Chinoise, 50Q-8). (3 Ursae ^^iaoris, the Pola,Star of 
■>^1000 B.C., is still called the God's^Star, Ti simi or Ti^n Ti simj. 
The present Pole Star {n Ursas Minoris) besides the name of 
Kou-chen, from the Arab Kachah, which it shares with several sur- 
rounding stars, now enjoys the polestar title of Tien^u-amj TaJTi, 
the Great^od Emperor of Heavens. 

1259) It is interesting to examine how the symbolism of the 
Astrof/nosic Indestructible (Uranographie Chinoise, 75) can be 
obtained. Let us see for instance Tjou, the sixteenth uu (the second 
sill of Babylon) which is given us (p. 331-2) as the " Moissonneuse," 
whose symbol Ion represents, '■ Une femme portant sur sa tete un 
faisceau d'epis." No Chinese authority is given for the interpreta- 
tion. If we refer to the Slnvoh wan (89 A.D.) the phonetic Shiroh uan 
(1883), the Lnh shu t'un;/ of Min Ts'i Kih (1661), the Tchuen tze wei 
of Tung wei fu (1691), we find that the symbol in question was 

a self-spelling character lu — , composed of NIU=LIU, woman, 
suggesting the initial, and placed above it to suggest a final — k, one 
or other of the following characters : Kin, mortar, Kwan, pierced 
through, Kwai, empty basket. Km, looking crossways, or Kiran, 
accustomed. In course of time the phonetic suggestion has been 
forgotten, and the upper symbol has been altered : liiu written with 
y two eyes became only one, mnh, afterwards mu, ni£>ther, and mu not, 
and another symbol joined to it has become trhun;/, middle. The 
meaning of the whole is, a secluded woman, emptiness, seclusion, 
fagged, or troublesome member, &c , which are rather the reverse of 
the alleged symbolism. And among the ideo-phonetic derivates from 
the same we find words for : to drag, to plunder, to hollow out, 
basket for carriages, sowing machine, Sec, in fact nothing suggesting 
the harvest. 

Now let us examine another case. Mao, the Pleiades, which 
shows a curious confusion, made during tlie Han dynasty. Mao 
[Mnl in Chaldea) is written sun — open door ; the latter sign is and 
has always been Mao (the fourth sign of the duodenary cycle) ; the 
former represents the three stars which figured in the oldest forms, 
as shown (save the Shwoh iraii) by the standard works above men- 
tioned. This Man is much like another character i/u {Jin in com- 
pounds) a closed door, barred at the top ; the only difierence between 
the two being a bar at the top of the latter which is lacking in Mao. 
This yu or Im joined with the sign for tree, makes liu, the tree-liu, 
or willow, which is the name given to six, afterwards eight, small 
sta.vs oi //ydra. In the SliiMviny, ode on small^ stars, Siao Siny, 
the poet says : " Small are those starlets, and there are Tsan (Orion) 
and ^[ao (the Pleiades). So the modern commentators have it (cf. 
J. Legge, < 'liin. r/o.s.s , iv. )^2), but the oldest interpreters did not 
think so. When Mao Tchang edited the Sin Kiny, 120 B.C., he 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 301 

understood T.srtn as referring to some stars in Scorpio, and the now 
alleged Mao as being Liu, the aforesaid star in Hijdra. He could 
not understand that so conspicuous star points as Pleiades and 
Orion should be spoken of as small stars. The author of the Tchun 
tsiu ijuan mimj pao of the following century, quoted in the K'amj hi 
tw tien, s.v. ^lao, shared the same view, and said that the stars of 
the Ode were the six (not seven) star 7v2« (of Hydra). It must not be 
forgotten that the use of determinatives had not yet reached its later 
fixity. In L'ran. Chin, we are told that Mao was composed of sun 
and Liu, door shut, and therefore that it must have indicated 
the autumn, thousands of years before, and that the composition 
s u n — o pen door was an after thought and a mistake. We have 
seen that such was not the case and we have seen also how the mis- 
conception arose, ^[ao, the Pleiades, the stars of the Open Door an- j 
nounced the spring c. 2250 B C. The astronomical book of She Id 
27, 12/-.) says that between the Mao. Pleiades, and Pi/h, the Hyades 
(where passes the ecliptic) was a (or the) route of heaven, Tien 
Kiai, which is an interesting confirmation of the meaning of Mao. 
"With reference to the Gates of Heaven through which 
passes the ecliptic, herewith another instance which shows 
the late and western sources of^ the Chinese astronomical 
notions ; the San ho (o Procyon, ft and /; Canis Minor) and the 
Poh ho (Castor, Pollux, kc, Gemini"), respectively the South and 
North River, and also called Gates of Heaven, occupy this position 
just south and north of the ecliptic, east of the Milky Way. 

1260) As unhappy result of this, Cf . for a typical instance, p. 3G8 : 
" Ce qui a donne lieu au fameux passage du Chou Kin;/ que I'u 
(the 19th Siu) aime la pluie;" ni the foot note we find a Chinese 
quotation to that effect from a iommentarn (by Tsai Yung, 175 A. D.) 
on the Great Plan, Hunf/fan. chapter of the Shti Kin<j, but not from 
the text, where as a matter of fact the word py does not appear at ) 
all ! The text, par, 38, says only that " some stars love the wind 
and some love the rain. Another instance in another way is the ) 
myth of the C o w h e r d and Spinning Damsel, identified (^ 
with stars near the Milky W^ay, either with the River's Drum, 
Ho Ku, ft 7 Aquila, or the constellation of the Ox Niu (parts of 
Capricornus and Sagittarius), and Wega, « Lyrs. Hwai nan tze 
(d. 122 B.C.) first gave currency to a romantic idea on the subject 
by declaring that the two are separated all the year round, except 
on the seventh night of the seventh month, when " Magpies fill up } 
the Milky Way and enable the Spinning Damsel to cross over." 
(Cf. Mayers, ( 'h. 11. M. 311.) In the Cmin. Chin , p. 494, we are told , 
that the myth must date 1G,000 years ago, because at that time the two ) 
constellations were culminating together at the winter solstice ! 
But there is no evidence whatever that the myth existed in remote 
historical times. The learned author refers to some customs of the 
Dames du Palais in TfV/ and 7'.s/», mentioned in the 7u»// IVu shui 
shi Id of our sixth century, as customs of these states during the 
TcHou dynasty, while they are simply those of two contemporary I 
dynasties reigning in north and south China about 400 A.D. This 



302 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

is shown by several other contemporary works, cf. T. P. Y. L , kiv. 
31, fol. 6-11. My explanation is much more simple. When Han 
Wu-ti had become Emperor in 140 B.C., attention was called by 
the courtiers and myth-mongers frequenting his court to the seventh 
day of the seventh month which was his birthday. Now that time 
of the year is that of the annual appearance of a shower of shooting 
stars in the vicinity of the two constellations in question. These 
shooting stars became the magpies of the myth which was built 
upon these circumstances. I just find in the T. P. Y. L., 875, 7, 7r. 
instances of shooting stars near the Spinning Damsel in 193 and 
350 A.D., in the middle of the year. In order to work out the 
matter more completely, cf. Ed. Biot, Catalogue General des Etoiles 
filantes, th\, depuis le Vile siccle ar. J. C, d^apres les doniments 
rhinols: Mem. pres. Acad, des Sc, 1848, x. 129-3.52, 415-422; 
P. Parker, Observations )>iade at Canton on the Shooting Stars of the 
10th and 11th August, 1839: Silliman Journal, 1840, xxxviii. 
301-6. 

1261) China orFAam, T'oung Pao, Sept, 1891, p. 240. 

1262) Cf. the following articles of the same scholar in Nature: 
(hi some points in Ancient Kijiiptian Astrroionn/ : January 28, 
Feb. 18, 1892. On the Earhj Temple and Pi/ramid Guilders : May 
18. The Earhi Asterisms : Sept. 7, 28, Dec. The Orit/in of the 
Year: March 29, June 2, Nov. 10, 1892, Jan. 5, 1893. Cf. Also 
P. Jensen, Die Kosmologie der JJabi/lonier, Strasburg, 1890 ; Fritz 
Hommel, I>ie Astronomie der alter Chalda'rr : Ausland, 1891-2, 
With the progress of research in Chaldean Astronomy grows the 
evidence of the Chinese indebtedness to it. Cf. Mul, Mao, Pleiades, 
Ku, Kio Spica, &c. ; part of Draco, an enclosure, in both 
countries, &c. Cf. add. 41. 



V. — On IJAK, as a Name uf the Earliest Cirilised Chinese. 

321. Bak Sing is the earliest denomination in their historical 
literature which the Chinese used to give to themselves, exclusively of 
the native populations they had subdued. The Bak Sings were the 
followers of Hwang-ti who came with him from .the north-west, and 
settled at first in the south-west corner of Kansuh. Since more than ten 
years I have several times objected to the common rendering of Bak sings 
by Hundred Families, i-*^-^ and I have said that in my opinion, an early 
ethnical name of the people underlies this denomination. This view 
has been accepted by many scholars, ignored by several, and once or 
twice protested against. My readers may therefore be glad to find 
here the various reasons, never as yet put together, on which are based 
my conclusions to that effect. 







CHINESE CIVILISATION. 303 

322. Shitf, a compound symbol meaning literally, " born (sheng) 
from one woman (;wi<)," was apparently applicable originally to all 
those born from one wife only and to their descendants, all necessarily 
bearing the same surname. ^-'^■* In the oldest etymological dictionary, 
the Shwoh wan of the first century, it is described as " that with 
which a man is born." And in the historical texts since the most 
remote times it is applied to the clans, or their names, belonging 
exclusively to the Chinese proper. Their number was very small at 
first, and Ave hear of the " eight most ancient surnames," as if this 
was an established fact.'-*55 The descendants of Hwang-ti are said to 
have borne only twelve surnames, ^^eB and the Emperor Shun was 
praised in after ages for having given government employment to all 
the chiefs of the Sings, less than twenty in number. Since that 
remote time they have multiplied to thousands, but those which are 
most frequently met do not reach a total of beyond four hundred and 
fifty.1267 

323. BAK was a self-spelling symbol made of two sujierposed 
characters in the script of oldest times. i-^** It was composed of J 
Pei, precious, or P eJi, white, or Pi, nose, or M uk — Buk, eye, 
for the initial and of KHa, hia below, or of li'ao effort, for the 
final consonant. The selection of these symbols traditional as it was 

is rather instructive. The nose among the Chinese as in the west, l 
was looked upon as the beginning of the child, i-*^* hence the use of the 
character denotes here that the meaning of B a k had once in itself 
something initial ; the eye was most important as a suggestion which ' 
we shall have to remember further on. 

As a significative symbol, Bak occurs in ancient liturature with 
three difierent meanings : — 

(1) A hundred, as a definite number. 1270 

(2) A collective and indefinite number, all the things or beings 
appearing to the front of their class or kind. 

(3) To the front, forward, to incite, exertion, &c. 

324. In the expression ]hik Sin;/, the first symbol cannot have had 
in China the meaning of one hundred as a definite number, for the 
conclusive reason that the number of Sings in early times was not 
one-fifth of that, as we have just seen. If the Sings ever numbered 



304 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

a hundred before, it would be at the original seat of the race in West 
Asia, in the country from where Hwan»-ti had originated with his 
followers. i^''^ The use of a numeral as a people's own name is a well- 
known feature of some Ural-Altaic races. Let us remember here the 
name of the Kirghizes, from kirk, forty, and that of the Yns Usbek 
tribes, meaning properly the H u n d r e d.1272 

325. Kung Yng-ta the famous commentator of the classics 
(A.D. 574-048) in his remarks on the first book of the Sim Kiny has 
shown most positively that Balcjim/ was a designation of the foremost 
families of the st^^te, and that it was still so, under the Tchou 
dynasty. The Chinese families alone having sings and forming the 
elite of the population, the exalting meaning was befitting to the 
case. It included them all, 1273 whence the expression Wan Sings 
the 10,000 surnames occasionally used in its stead. The 
same reason of exclusiveness applies to the expression IJak 
Kwan, all the officers because they were necessarily all 
belonging to the elite or Chinese sini/s. And it does not follow from 
the equation Ba/i:= Wan with reference to the Sings that Bak had a 
wholesale meaning. As an evidence of this, one may remark that the 
expression, which should be expected otherwise, of Bak Min for all the 
people does not exist at all in the Shu Riiui, nor in the Shi Kintj ; it 
is ivan min which occurs, and the use of u-an, and even that of tchao, 
million, as a collective term is usual in the classics. Bak appears 
fourteen times in the Shu, and twice in the Shi, with Sinf/, and in 
thirty expressions in the two works. ^-''^ On the other hand wan, ten 
thousand, is met with a hundred times or more as a wholesale 
collective noun in the two great classics we have just named. 

* '^2Q. To resume, the term Bak occurs in the ancient literature,i275 with 
reference only to choice or foremost beings or things, 1276 and it does 
apply generally to a complete body of beings or things, as far as that 
body is by itself an elite in its kind. 

Let us remark before proceeding any further that Bak appears also 
to be a family surname, although it has not been preserved to the 
present day in its singleness. In the list of the mythical kings we 
find a Bak Wan;/, i.e.. King of Bak. During the Tchou dynasty we 
meet such names as Bak Li, Bay Femi.^'^'^'' And in the Peh Kia Simj 
we find Beli, indifferently written with the symbol hundred or 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 805 

w hi te. Bak Si'yiu can be compared to such expressions as Li min, 
the fA, or able-bodied people,'-"** }rto jen, the men Yao, Tcliutu/ Kia, 
the family Tchung, the Hunij Kia, the family Sung, the Ts'ai Kia, 
the family Ts'ai, the Lnnri Kia, the family Lung, &c. Bak was not a 
proper name of forgotten or foreign origin whose meaning was lost. 
It was a word still preserving its pristine transparent form, whose 
meaning was yet fully understood by the people, being helped 
to that effect by the ideographism of the writing. It was that 
aud it was also an indefinite collective, meaning the foremost and the 
utmost. 

327. It appears from the foregoing remarks that the Chinese 
sources alone cannot give a satisfactory explanation of the various 
acceptations of Bak. The Mother writing and the cradle land of the 
earliest civilisers of China happily liave much to say in the matter, 
and they come to the rescue. We have had to notice in the Ku-wen 
sp«ilings of Bak, that thr ideogram for eye was most important. > 
Now in the old Babylonian writing from which the earliest Chinese 
symbols were derived, more or less directly, the symbol for e j e has 
the sound Bakh, ?Lnd the meanings to see, foremost, before, 
and the like.. It means also a thousand. The symbol for 
hundred,^ me, which looks like the crippled form of the other, means 
also n u rn e r u s.^279 i^ the Akkadian vocabulary, which is the oldest 
representative of the large linguistic formation to which the Chinese 
belongs,, we find such words as Balk, prince, Bakri, strong, 
n u m.e r o u s. Bah, abounding, flourishing, Ac'^so We may 
com;pare to these the Turkish ho(/h, prince, the Mongolian haijha, 
thousand, the Chinese Bak, Puk, &c.,^'^^^ great, &c. 

/The existence at the fountain head of their civilisation of a word 
%nd similar symbol having the same meanings as those preserved by 
the Chinese is more than suggestive in favour of our views. 

328. But this is not all. The same word appears to have been used 
e Atensively as a geographical and ethnical term in that same region 
fr om which the early civilisers of China have come according to all pro- 
baLiiiities. Bakhtyari, Bagistan (Behistun), Bagdad, Bakhdi (Baktra) 
are instances 01 the case. Moreover we hear in the Elamite inscrip- 
tions of a King of Baks,i-'«2 which fact shows that sister tribes of the 



/ 



306 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

early civilised Chinese were still in existence in. later historical 

times. 

329. Therefore we cannot but be satisfied that the word Bak was used 
as an ethnical qualificative, and that in calling themselves Bak Sings or 
Bak families, the early Chinese were only preserving the traditional 
and limited used of a wor^, whose meaning was still clear to them. 
We may call them the Baks or the Bak Sings without hesitation, but 
not the Hundred Families. 

Notes — 

1263) Cf. The Chinese Mythical Kimjs: Acad. 6th October, 1883 ; 
The Layif/uaf/e of China before the Chinese, 1887, p. 116-8; Wheat 
carried from Mesopotamia to earlt/ China, 1888, p. 6 ; Les Langnes, 
1888, add. p. 159-160. 

1264 There is no evidence available that the meaning suggested by 
the composition of the ideogram was yet understood at any earliest 
time of Chinese history. 

1265) Cf. Herbert A. Giles, On the Surnames of the Chinese: Historic 
China, 1882, p. 359. 

1266) Kiroh-yu, Six tch'en. K. K. Douglas, China, 1887, p. 250-1, 
has given these twelve surnames. 

1267) In the well known Peh Kia Siny, compiled under the Sung 
dynasty, where are found the names of 408 single and 30 double 
of the Sings most commonly met, more than one hundred of them 

\ claim Hwang-ti as their ancestor. In the K'any hi tze tien, 1678 
simple, 168 double, and 8 triple Sings are mentioned ; while in the 
great Cyclopaedia Ku Kin fu shu tsih tch'eny there are as many as 
4657 entered, 3038 of which are single, as stated ««/)?•</ note 105. 
An interesting statement, although somewhat unclear, occurs about 
the Sings, in the Tso tvhuen, Yn Kung, viii. 10, or 715 B.C.; Chin. 
Class, v. 26. 

1268) Min Ts'i Kih, Lnh shu tuny, x. 1 v. Fu Lwang-siang, Lnl shu 
fun huy, ii. 46 v. Tung Wei fu, Tchuen tze wei. In the old Tchuen 
style we find the expression Jiak sm;/ written in one complex symool, 
made of Muk-Buk, eye, with shany, life, over it, suggesting 
distantly the reading ; \s there are two instances of the case, there 
is no mistake in the decipherment. 

1269) Notably among the Egyptians. In Chinese, pi tsin, nose 
ancestor, means first ances tor. 

1270) In some ancient texts, as for instance in the old MS. of 
Lao tze's work, the symbol Bak has el. 9 as an adjunct for the 
meaning of 100. But such is not always the case in other texts. 

1271) But there is no evidence of such a thing which must remain in 
the dark of the past, long before the migration eastward of the early 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 307 

Chinese, and is apparently contradicted by the evidence collected 
below. 

1272) Cf. W. Uadlofi, Zeits.f. Erdk., 1871, p. 505. Cf. tmne, all 
in Mandshu, tmnen, 10,000 in Mongol, tumen, name of a leader 
among the Hiung-nus. 

1273) Wan Sinij-occnrs only live times in the Shu and twice in the 
Sfti Kings. 

1274) In some of these however the meaning hundred is clear. 
In the .S7t?( hitifi, ^hi J\^i>i(/, Lvn-i/u, Tihun-yumi, Ta hioh, Trliun 
tsiu, and Mniti-t^i', I have counted thirty-two different expressions 
composed with Bak; in nine of them the meaning hundred is 
clear, and in some cases imperative, while in the twenty-three others 
the word means the foremost and utmost of the kind or class referred 
to. Cf. J. Legge, Cfiinese Clasms, vol. iv. p. 371, 420, 440, 486, 
548, *)49, 967; vol. i. p. 352 ; vol. ii. p. 246 ; and vol. iii. p. 49, 55, 
64, 198, 341, 348, ;i8l, 410, 432, 441, 460, 498, 515, 545; vol. iv. 
p. 357, 362, 492, 551, SBC, 638 ; vol. ii. p. 31 ; vol. i. p. 190. 

1275) With a few exceptions in late times arisen from the usual 
abuse of terms. 

1276) Cf. for instance SJm Kinrj, v., x. 10, and xvi. 9. 

1277) llcik-Ii of the State of Ts'in in the seventh century. l'>ak funri 
a disciple of Lieh-tze. But this Bak had probably no connection 
with the original Bak Sings. 

1278) Cf. On this name my paper on The Black Heads of Babj/lnnia 
and ancient China, 1891, par. 21. The use of Kia Avas originally 
reserved for family in speaking of the native population of the 
country in contradistinction with Siuij chiefly used for the Chinese 
themselves. 

1279) M. C. J. Ball, The Acradian Affinities with Chinese, 1893, has 
suggested on other ground the same confusion that is noticed here 
of the two symbols by the civilisers of China. 

1280) Cf. Rud. Brunnow, Classified List of Crtneiform Characters, 
Nos. 9257, 926.5, 9287; 10,354, 10,372^ 10,374, 10,356, 7267, 
7269, 7272, &c Cf. also the Assyrian words: Imkhar, to collect, 
group; hafcluir, splendour; bakidat, the own people of the king 
(Sarg. 46). 

1281) The latter have been studied by G. Schlegel, Sinico-An/aca, 
p. 85- 

1282) As shown by Mr. W. St. Chad Boscawen. Cf. Les Lanrines de 
la Chine avant les Cfiinnis, p ir)9. Another name of interest 
belonging to a portion of the early Chinese is that now read //to, which 
the Ku-wen spellings show to have been originally read Ketchi =:= Ket- 
si=Katse. The name is known in West Asia. The best instance 
occurs in the famous Stele des Vautours. There we see Eannada * 
King of Sirpurra or Lagash, son of Akurgal, and grandson of ( 
Urnina, striking victoriously at his enemies who belonged to the 
country of Ish-han or KasJitK These enemies deformed their skulls 



308 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

as the Bak Sings used to do in later times. Could they be the 
ancestors of the latter? Cf B. and 0. R., vi. 96, and Tapered Heads 
in Anterior Asia and Earltj China, ibid. p. 195. On Sirpurra, c£. 
W. St. Chad Boscawen, ibid. vii. 2. 



VI. — Allef/ed difficulty of the Journey from West to East Asia. 

330. One of the semi-objections first made against my discovery 
of the south-west Asiatic origin of the Chinese civilisation was the 
great distance, and the difficulty of the route between west and east 
Asia for large caravans and migratory tribes. The objection is 
specious, but must disappear on further consideration, geographical 
and historical. Some or the following facts have already been put 
forward by me as an answer to the objection, but as I have some new 
facts to quote I may as well marshall all of them together. 

The chief difficulty of the route has always been the passage through 
the Bolor, or Pamir, or Tsung-ling mountains, impracticable except at 
one season of the year to reach the Chinese Turkestan. The more 
circuitous route by the north, i.e., through Ferghana, which was not 
suggested by the existence there of gems or valuable products coveted 
by traders does not seem to have been known and used, but much later, 
when the growing bulk of the trade made it necessary to find a more 
convenient route than the older one. At first the trade route to the 
east was only that which was made imperative by nature and the 
localities of the products to get. This was the route through Badak- 
shan, Wakhan, and Yarkand to the jade mines as we shall see further 
on (note 1291). 

331. Two routes were known and used by the Chinese about the 
Christian era. They are described in the Annals of the first Han 
dynasty,i-'^3 as follows : — " From Yii-men (jade gate) and Yang barrier 
(north-west Kansuh) there are two roads to the western regions. That 
by Shen-shen, skirting the river Fo, on the north of the Nan Shan 
(southern range) and leading west to Sha-Kiu (Yarkand) is the 
southern road. After, this road passes the Tsung-ling mountains, 
and leads to the country of the great Yueh-ti and of the Arsacidce. 
The northern road starts from the Royal Palace of the Anterior Kiii- 
tze {i.e. from Turfan),'-"*^ following the course of the river Po, in the 
direction of the Peh Shan (northern range) as far as Sti-lih (Kashgar), 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 309 

This road passing westward across the Tsung-ling range, goes on to 
Ta-yuan fFerghana, K'ang Kiu (Sogdiana), and the Yem-tsai (Alani, 
near the Caspian Sea)."'-'*-5 The two roads were thus following the 
Yarkand daria and the Kashgar daria respectively.1286 

332. In more remote times the route to the eastern lands was that 
which trade and nature had opened long before the migration of the 
Bak Sings. It was the trade route leading to the asbestos i-'^? and ruby 
mines of Badakshan, to those of Lapis-lazuli (in Khorasan and) in the 
same region, i^ss which was so highly prized in Babylonia and Egypt, 
and also to those of Nephrite Jade of Khotan, also highly valued in 
the Euphratean valley. i-**^ The unaccountable taste and partiality, 
traditionally displayed for jade by the Chinese since the earliest dates, 
suggest strongly that the early chieftains of the Bak families in 
Western Asia were engaged themselves in the commerce, and therefore 
were well acquainted with the trade route. Passing by the Khorasan, 
Meshed and Baktra, then through Badakshan along the upper course 
of the Oxus,^^^'' crossing either the Chichiklik or the Kandar Pass, of 
the Pamirs, reaches the Kashgarian Plain, i'-^' and the long renowned 
jade quarries^^^^ of the Yarkand daria and Khotan. 

333. Once over the Tsung-ling range, the country leading to China 
was neither so bare and wild nor the objectionable tracts of later 
times. ^^^3 And the geographical isolation in which China stands is 
greatly the result of geological phenomena which have occurred in 
historical ages, and have become obstructive only long after the 
Christian era. = 

In the western part of the Tarym valley, cities still mentioned 
during the First Han dynasty, in the eastern vicinity of the present 
Khotan, Yarkand, and Kashgar, were gradually sand buried in the 
following centuries. It is there that Bactro-Chinese coins older than 
the Christrian era, also manuscripts of the fifth century, and other 
antiquities have been dug out in recent years.1294 The Annals of the 
pre-cited dynasty recorded that in Yen-Ki (Karashar) and the various 
kingdoms of these western regions, the land was covered with cities, 
villages, cultivated fields, and domestic animals. 

334. Advancing in the direction of China it is the same thing. 
The geography of the heft Iklim, or seven climates, says that instead 



310 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

of a sandy desert, the route from Khotan to Kathay in fourteen days 
was formerly covered with towns and villages. i-^^ Several cities which 
existed at the time of the Chinese pilgrim Sung-yung (518 A.D.) had 
been buried in the sand when his illustrious fellow-countryman travelled 
on the same route in 629 A.D.'-"-"i Ruins of cities have been discovered 
in the eastern desert near the Lopnor i-s^ The history of Mirza 
Haidar, called Tarikh-i-Uaslt'uH, in describing the great Basin of 
Eastern Turkestan, says : — " Formerly there were several large cities 
in this plain ; the names of two have survived — Loh and Kank, but of 
the rest there is no trace or tradition, all is buried under the sand."i-5** 
According to a tradition reported by Johnson, 3G0 cities were buried 
in a single day by the sands of the Takla Makan desert (east of 
Yarkand). The Liu-sJia, or drifting sands, west of Yii men Kuan 
(An-si tchou of Outer Kansuh), were Ivnown to the ancient Chinese, 
and are mentioned already in the Yii Kun;/ of the Sku Kin;/, although 
they may not yet have assumed their importance of later times. 
When Muh Wang of Tchou, in 985 B.C. came back from his ex- 
pedition in Turkestan, he went further east than when starting, and 
was compelled to cross the sandy desert, where he happened to be 
famishing with thirst. '^"^ These circumstances are interesting because 
of some orological details which vouchsafe the genuineness of this 
recit,^-^*^" and because of the last peculiarity we have mentioned. We 
must remark also that the traditional accounts speaks only of a sandy 
desert, not of shifting sands ••^"' 

335. The foregoing notes make it therefore certain that the Eastern 
Turkestan was difterent in antiquity of what it is at present, and that 
numerous states have arisen and disappeared there in the course of 
ages. The long-famed Flowery Land was more easily approachable 
by this route than in later centuries. The difficulties of the journey 
were therefore not in the way when the Chinese Bak Sings chose to 
migrate to China. There are several instances of such migrations. 
If I am not mistaken the Kun-wu, about 1900 B.C., and the Tchou, 
about 1325 B.C., are instances of the case, but they are, perhaps, too 
much undistinguishable in the dim history to be accepted as con- 
vincing evidence. 



*tD 



336. Let us take some more recent cases of migrations from west 
to east. An important instance already put forward was that of the 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 311 

Kalmuck Tory;uths, who emigrated in 1772 from Russia into China. 1302 
But as they had been banished from the Chinese dominion not very 
long before, and as they came back to their ancient possessions on the 
invitation of the Emperor, th^ir case is not near enough to that of the 
Bak Sings of antiquity. 

337. Another instance quite satisfactory under that respect is that 
of the Turks Salar. They are still at present one of eight nations of 
the Turkomans, east of Meshed, on the road to Bokhara. i^os Dviring 
the Ming dynasty a part of them, driven from their country by 
internal discord, migrated to the Tibetan borders of China. In 1;}70 
three or four of them arrived from Samarkand to the banks of the 
Yellow River, and founded the present Salar head-village of Katze- 
Kmi (about eighty miles of Kimbun-Lusar) ; they were rapidly fol- 
lowed by others of their countrymen, and now the villages they occupy 
are 75 or 100 in number, with a population estimated at 8000 families 
at the lowest. 13^^ 

Notes. — 

1283) Tsieti han Shu, kiv. 9(), 1. In another page we find the 
following statement : The southern road passing Shen-shen tends 
southerly to Wu-i/h-ahaii-li, which is its terminus. Ibid., Wu-yh- 
shan-li=0-yk-san-ri=Alexandria:=Herat of the present day. Its 
position is given as follows in the same work : " Wu-yh-shan-li joins 
Ke-p'in (Kabulistan) on the east — it joins Bactria on the north — 
Ke-p'in joins it on the south-west — and Ansik (Parthia) joins it on 
the east." It was therefore between Bactria; Kabulistan and Parthia. 
Cf. A. Wylie Western Hellions, pp. 2, 15, 19, 20. 

1284) Peh She. T. P., 794, 5f. Also E. Bretschneider, Med. lies., 
ii. 189. 

1285) The Yem-tsai under the Second Han Dynasty were called 
A-lan-na ; under the After Wei, i.e., after 386 A.D., the country 
was called Snh teh, and also Uan-na-sha. Cf. Tioiii-tien : T. P., 
793, 10, and 797, 7 v., also Klaproth, Tableaux Historiqucs de VAsie; 
F. Hirth, China and the lloinan Orient, p. 189. Dr. Hirth proposes 
the equation Yem-tsai=An-tsai=Aorsi of Strabo. 

1286) With the increased intercourse during the Han dynasty, we 
hear of more routes. A branch of the south route was passing 
through the Hien-tn-shan, or Hindu Kush, to Kabulistan ; its 
difficulties are graphically described in the notice on Ke-p'in in the 
Tsien Han Shn. Cf. A. Wylie, Western Liegions, p. 18, and also on 
the northern route, p. 33. 

1287) On asbestos, supra, p. 31 and note 761. 




312 ORIGIN OF THE EAKLY 

1288) Deposits of lapis-lazuli are few. Arab geographers and min- 
eralogists mention mines of lazulite at Hastan, Bataha-ristan hill, 
north-east Persia. Cf. Teifashi, in CI. Mullet, Essai sur la Miner- 
alo(jle Arabe, pp. 152, 198 ; J. A. Fev-Mar., 1868. Abulfeda, 
Geoijraphie, tr. Reinaud, p. 474 ; Edrisi, Geographie, tr. Jaubert, 
478. On those of Badakshan, Kuram valley ; cf. J. Wood, A 
Journey to the source of the Upper O.rus, 1872, p. 169-172, and H. 
Yule, Marco Polo, i. 170. On lapis-lazuli in Assyrio-Babylonia, cf. 
Perrot-Chipiez, Art Antique, ii. 906. 

1289) Microscopic structure has shown that the Nephrite objects found 
in Assyro-Babylonia have come from the Turkestan mines, cf. below 
add. 162. 

1290) On Rock inscriptions in cuneiforms said to have been seen in 
Wakhan, E. of Badakshan, cf. B. and 0. R., vi. 968 ; cylinders 
with cuneiform inscriptions have years ago been found in the same 
region. Cf. Proc. R. G. S. 

1291) On the occasional necessity for some travellers to reach first 
Kashgar ; cf. H. Yule, Marco Polo, i. 191. Since the time of Wood, 
1838, and especially since 1868, not a few British, French, Russian, 
and even Greek scholars, explorers and hunters, have crossed the 
Pamirs, partly or entirely in various directions. Among them we 
may mention : Hayward 1868, Potagos 1871, Gordon, Trotter, 
Biddulph 1874, Kostenko 1876, Severtsoff 1877, Oshanin 1878, 
Mushketoff 1879, Regel 1881, Ney Elias, 1885, Grombchewsky, 
Bogdanovitch 1888-91, Bonvalot, Capus, Pepin, 1888, Littledale 
1888-90, Cumberland 18!'0, Younghusband 1890-1, Bower 1891, 
Dunmore 1892, Taylor and others. Passing by the mines of 
Baddakshan and the valley of the Panj to Kala Panjah (capital of 
Wakhan), then by thevalley of the Wakan-su, Sarhad,Bozai Gumbaz, 
the Tchakmak Kul, the valley of the Aksu river and the Neza tash 
Pass the natural route leads to Tash-Kurgan, which is probably 
the famous Stone Tower of Ptolemy. From Tash Kurgan two sides 
could be taken accordin;/ to the seasons ; one passing at a short dis- 
tance of the Tagh Dumbash valley, then turning east across the Kandar 

^ pass into the Tung valley, and from there passing into that of the 
Yarkand daria, and leading not far from the jaj[e mines; the other 
. by the Chichiklik and Torut passes, Chihil Gumbaz, and the Kash- 
kasu pass, leading to Kashgar, and therefore necessitating occasion- 
ally an extra journey to reach the mines. This route from Bakakshan 
to Yarkand-Kashgar is recognised by experienced travellers as the 
most practicable and appears to have been always followed unto 
modern times. Horses and pack animals can be used but no carts. 
I am indebted to Mr. Ney Elias himself for some important inform- 
ation included in the present note. Cf. also F. D. Forsyth, Report 
of a Mission to Yarkanil, Calcutta, 1875, pp. 222-277 ; H. Bower, 
Report of a Jotirnei/ in Chinese Turkestan, in 1889-90, Calcutta, 
1891 ; and Henri Lansdell, Chinese Central Asia, 1890, ii. 11-19. 

1292) The jade mines of Khotan have been specially studied by 
H. Cayley 1871, H. v. Schlagintweit 1873, F. Stoliczka 1874, and 



chinesp: civilisation. 313 

more recently, 1889-91, by Grombchewsky and Bogdanovitch who 
have visited the rocky banks of the Keskem daria (Yarkand daria), 
chiefly formed of white jadeite (Hke that of Upper Burma), within - 

which exists a huge "dyke of dark nephrite, from which was taken 

the tombstone of TamerjLan now at Samerkand. On a curious 
tradition about this white and dark jade seen by Hwang-ti in his — 
migration to the east, cf. T)elow, § 348. 

1293) It is important to remark that in the relation of Muh Wang's 
journey to Turkestan, in 986 B.C , two places are mentioned by 
names said to have been given to them by the kings of older times. 
Cf. ^uprd i 288. 

1294) Percy Gardner. Coins from- Kashjar, 1879 ; supra note 947 ; 
and my Catalogue of Chinese Coins, 1892, p. 393-4. The Bower 
MS., of about 470 A.D., which proves to be the older Sanskrit MS. 
in existence has been discovered near Kuchar, Kucha, Kutche. Cf. 
Proc. As. Soc. BeiK/al, Nov., 1890 ; Dr. Hoernle, Journ. As. Sac. 
Benijal, 1893, Ixii. 9-18; The Academy, Aug. 12, 1893, p. 136. Cf. 
also Capt. F. Bower, Report of a Journey in Chinese Turkestan, 
in 1889-90 : Gov. Printing Office, Calcutta, 1891. 

1295) E. Quatremere, Notices et E.vtrait^ des Manuscrits, vol. xiv. 
476, 477. It was the southern route followed by Fa-hian on his 
way to India ; by Hiuen Ts'ang on his way back ; and by Shah 
Rukhs's ambassadors on their return from China in 1421. Cf. H. 
Yule, Marco Polo, vol. i. p. 198. 

1296) S. Beal, Si yic Ki, vol. i., intr. 85-6 ; vol. ii. p. 324-5. 

1297) Dutreuil de Rhins, Asie Centrale, 1890, p. 148. We may 
expect some fresh information on these regions from the recent 
journey of M. St. George Littledale, and from the exploration of 
the Nan Shan range between the Lop-nor and the Kuku-nor by the 
expedition of Capt. Eoboroffsky and Lieut. Kozloff, this year, 1894. 

1298) Cf. H. Yule, Marco Polo, 2, vol. i. p. 201. On the buried 
cities cf. Johnson, J. R. G. S., 1870, xxxix.; Douglas Forsyth, 
On the Biiried Cities of the Shiftiny Sands of the Great Desert of 
Gobi; ibid., 1878, xlvii. ; Bellew, Kashmir and Kashyar, p. 370-1. 

1299) *' The Son of Heaven then marched forthwith in an easterly 
direction, and, by a turn to the south, crossed the sandy plain. 
On the 424th day (of this journey) the Son of Heaven was famishing 
with thirst in the sandy plains, when some went to search for 
drinking water. But before it was brought, one of the commanders 
of the seven detachments (of his body guard) called Kao Pen-jung, 
cut the throat of his left-hand carriage horse, gathered the pure 
blood, and gave it to the Son of Heaven to drink. The Son of 
Heaven found it delicious." Muh T'ien-tze chuen, tv. Eitel, §G2. 

13<»0) The Muh Tien-tze chuen records the following : " On the 
412th day (forty days after he began to return), the Son of Heaven 
reached the river Hien. Thence he marched forthwith eastwards 
(stopping merely) to (let the people) drink, and proceeded again. 
He then turned forthwith towards the south-east. On the 422nd 



^s. 



314 OBIGIN OF THE EARLY 

day he reached the mountains of Kn-a-lu, which form a triple ring 
like a walled city. This is the region guarded hy the Yah and Hu 
tribes." ibid, j j 60-61. According to the stations mentioned in the 
recit, the region they reached was that of Khamil or Hami. Modern 
geographers have remarked that Barkul is surrounded on the side 
of Khamil by three mountain ridges. Cf. E. Reclus, Asic Orientale, 
p. 161. 

1301) On the east of Khamil is the desert called Han-hai in Chinese, 
dry sea, and not dried sea, as wanted by Richtofen, China, i. 

.^ ?4, in support of his theory of the existence there in historical times 
of a vast lake, for which there is no evidence whatever in the Chinese 
J'/ traditions and records. Han-hai is the Chinese transcript, not 
translation, of a foreign name which appeared for the first time 
in 119 B.C. Cf. E. Bretschneider, Mediacal Researches, i. If), 57, 
and ii 191. 

1302) Cf. on the migration of the Torguths : Description de la Chine 
Occidentale, trad. M. Gueluy : Museon, Avril, 1886, vol. v., p. 238- 
246. Meiiioires concernant les Chinois, i., 408. H. H. Howorth, 
Historij of the Mongols, i. 575, 57'^. 

1303) Girard de Rialle, Asie Centrale 2, p. 105. Abu Zeid, in the 
ninth century said that between the Sogdiana and China, the journey 
takes two months. Cf. Reinaud, Jtelation des Arahes, p. 114. 

1804) Cf. Woodville Rockhill, The Land of the Lamas, and his 
letter 1st March, 1892, in J. R. A. S., July 1892, p. 592. 



VII. — Silence of Westeryi Antiquiti/. 

338. It has been remarked that the existence of a mighty and 
highly civilised empire in eastern Asia in antiquity is not consistent 
with the complete silence of the ancients. The first part of the 
remark is answered by the fact that no such great empire was in 
existence. The Chinese formed for long only a small and comparatively 
poor State, or agglomeration of States, struggling to establish their 
sway over the native populations of the country of their adoption. 
They were too far away to be entangled in any of the wars and 
political movements which occurred in Western Asia. Travelling 
merchants were only those who could know something about them, 
and we are aware that traders' records were not mentioned in 
history. 1305 On the other hand we do not know what undiscovered or 
undeciphered texts may not have in store about relations hitherto un- 
suspected on that side with the east. The geographical horizon of 
the ancient civilisation of the west has already been considerably 
enlarged by the progress of research. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 815 

339. As to China herself, the Middle Kingdom, long surrounded by 
semi-barbarous states, could not but through them have any relations 
with the outside world. As soon as powerful and rich enough we see 
it moving and attracting foreigners. ]\Iy readers will be surprised in 
perusing the chronological list at the end of the present work of the 
number of communications with the west which have taken place. 
There are no less than a score of instances previous to 1000 B.C., three 
of which are journeys made westward, but not far, by Chinese. In 
986 Muh Wang of Tchou made his famous journey in Turkestan, and 
the seventh century saw the first arrival of sea traders of the Indian 
ocean. Afterwards relations became more frequent, and have 
not been interrupted ever since. And when the Chinese Empire had 
been barely established for a century, we hear of an Emperor enter- 
taining for several years the project of conquering Baktria, and the in- 
tervening lands by the route through India. ^^oe 

Notes — 

1305) The same thing occurs in the large Chinese historical works, 
and it is only in special books on separate subjects that we find here 
and there special references made to these small facts so interesting 
to know for the history of civilisation. 

1306) Cf. supra sections 269, 271. 



316 ORIGIN OF THE EABLY 



CHAPTER X. 

Essay of Historical and Geographical Reconstruction from 

Traditions and Legends of the Migration of Civilised Chinese 

Bak Sings from West Asia to China about 2332-2285-2282 B.C. 



s 
340. The following chapter is an attempt at restoring page 

of history, hitherto unwritten, from fragments of information 

scattered in historical works, traditions, and legends, put together 

chronologically and geographically with the help of extraneous sources, 

chiefly western, of that period of antiquity. No comprehensive history 

of these ages has been preserved in China from olden times. But a 

peculiarity of the Chinese mind comes happily to the aid of the 

enquirer. In their reverence for any sort of precedent, the Chinese 

writers, either philosophers or politicians, moralists, poets or historians, 

who were generally well informed of their ancient literature and 

traditions, have always been fond of making allusions to circumstances 

and events of antiquity. These allusions form by themselves an 

additional source of information which we could not neglect. 

341. Szema Tsien, the great astrologer historian, appears from his 
own statement not to have been able to get at the meaning of the 
broken traditions concerning the early period ; his silence about the 
government of Shao-Hao, contemporary of Hwang-ti and of Tchwan 
Hiiih, which forms so conspicuous a feature of the gradual advance of 
the Bak Sings in China, and his inaccurate geographical statements, 
show his difficulties about these beginnings. It was said against the 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 317 

complaints of inefficiency of his work which were made soon after- 
wards, that he had not access to many ancient books which saved 
from the persecution of literature had found their way in other 
collections than the Imperial Library, such as that of Teh Hien, king 
of Hoh-Kien. Anyhow, in 60 A.D., Pien-piao, Chief Recorder of 
State, was commissioned to supply the deficiencies of the She Ki, and 
his first move was to get access to these valuable treasures, but he 
died soon afterwards, and the matter remained in suspense until Pan-Ku 
who, after 76 A.D,, compiled to the same efiect a Tsai-Ki, or Com- 
plete Record, which unhappily has long been lost. 

342. A later compiler and genuine investigator, Hwang-p'u Mi, 
has worked out the same materials with criticism and care. Unhappily 
again his valuable researches, which we have had occasion to praise 
before, are only available to us in fragments, through the quotations 
made of them in later works, such as in the great Cyclopa3dia of 
extracts, the Tai jnng yii Ian, of 983 A.D., in 1000 kiv. As to the 
great historical works of the Sung dynasty, commencing with the 
Ki kii lull of Sema Kwang, the Tiuvj kien ivai ki of Liu Shu, and the 
Tung kien kang mich, edited by Tchu Hi, they are not reliable 
authorities for the period preceding the fourth century B.C. The least 
use made of them the better for those who wish to have a view as 
accurate as possible of the early times. The sole aim of these patriotic 
authors was the magnifying of the past ; their ignorance of ancient 
geography, and their lack of historical criticism has led them most 
often to a blind acceptation of all favourable traditions and legends, 
and rejection of the unfavourable ; they have not been able to distin- 
guish the old and original ones and those which have accrued in 
course of time from foreign sources, or from undue inferences 
developed out of simpler statements of antiquity. 

I. — Fro)ii their original seat to the Jade Mines. 

343. In the second half of the third millenium B.C., the region 
east of the Zagros and north of the Bakhtyari hills, in the vicinity of 
Elam, was occupied by various populations, Ugro-Altaic of an early 
type, Semites, and AUophylians. Among them some were Semitic 
warlike nomads, whence their designation of Tsab Manilas, which has 
this meaning.i3u7 Others were not wanderers, and were addicted on the 



\ 



318 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

contrary to agricultural pursuits and also to trade. Some of the latter 
were known as the BAks,i.e., the numerous, flourishing, and foremost.i^os 
Their principal articles of commerce were salt from the great steppe 
of Khorasan, lapis-lazuli and tin from Mesched,i3u9 rubies, turquoises, 
silver, asbestos, also lapis from Badakshan, and jade, dark and white, 
from Eastern Turkestan. The civilisation of Babylonia had pene- 
trated among them from early times, principally through Elam.i^ii^ 

The Baks, at least the Bak Sings, those of the Baks who became 
the civilisers of China, if they belonged to the yellow races, which 
seems more than doubtful, had none of their exaggerated characteristics. 
We know that they had blue eyes, not turned up^ and no black hair ; 
moreover they used to taper their heads. i3ii Their language was con- 
nected with those of the Sumero-Akkadians, and of the Turano- 
Scythian stock of languages at large.^312 

344. The Baks had submitted for some 300 years to the rule of the 
successors of Sargon, Shennung in Chinese, ^^is perhaps since the days 
of Dungi (Dumkih-Tsang-kieh), under whose reign they had learnt the 
art of writing like footprints of birds (i.e., in the cuneiform style), when 
about 2332 B.C., Kung-Sun, son of the Chief of Sho-ten (? the King 
of Shushan, Elam), and then ten or fifteen years old, became Prince 
of the Hien-i/uen, or Kora-the-long-robed, a part of the Bak tribes. ^^h 
The authority of the successors of Shennung (Sargon) was on the 
wane, and under the reign of the seventieth of these kings, named 
DuMANG (? Uru Du MAN sun of the cuneiform lists), ^^^^ the regional 
princes fighting each other became cruelly oppressive to the Bak Sings, 
and levied heavy duties on their salt. The Shennung King being 
powerless to re-establish order, the Hien-yuen chief then compelled 
them to submit (to him), with the exception of the TcJdvus^^^^ (? the 
Tsabs), who continued to be most outrageous, but dared not come 
forward and attack. Kung-sun thus established his authority at 
defiance with that of the former suzerain. The Dan-tik (=Dintirki, 
Babylon,) king projected then to invade and oppress the rebel princes 
who rallied around the Hien-yuen chief. The latter consolidated his 
power, and then called to arms and to help several tribes bearing 
N> names jof animalgi'^i'' (a habit common in anterior Asia), and fought 
against the said king in the plains of Fcm-tsiiten, Reverting Source (? a 
tidal river), three different battles. The result was that afterwards 
he could do what he had wanted.1^1*^ Lih muh (anc. Lehrauh ; '? Bab. 




CHINESE CIVILISATION. 319 

Lukmuh), Tanff sien, Ta hun;/,^^^^ Shen nmuj ImaiKj tchih (a Shennungite 
controller), Fung Kii, Ta Tchen, Ta shan Id (great mountain reverer), 
Kwei-yii Kin (demons classifier), Funtj hu, Kun<j Kia (great butt" coats), 
and others formed his officers and army. He distributed them over 
the four regions as superintendents. ^^^o 

245. The Tchivus (Tsabs), however, proved obdurate ; they were 
eighty-one brothers, all descendants of Shennung (Sargon), had a year 
of ten months, and were skilful at using war weapons. In accord 
with the other princes the Hien-yuen leader sent Lih-muh and the 
Shennung-ite Imperial Officer, to their chief, but he refused to obey 
the imperial comm-inds. The struggle- was long and severe as fighting 
took place on fifty-two different occasions. They pursued him as far 
as the plain of Tchuh-lu (anc. Tiuk-lu,? Tiklat, the Tigris); and finally 
Yng lung was dispatched to put the chief of the Tchi-vus to death,i32i 
near the hills of Hungli, in the region of Tsuh-bi (Zab river). 1322 After 
this all the princes honoured the Hien*-yuen prince, who became *" 
Tien-tze, Son of Heaven ; he succeeded the Shennung-ite in authorit;/, 
and became Hu Nakhuntk, or YuJN^ai Hwang-ti.^323 All those who -^ 
beneath heaven were not obedient he pursued and punished, the 
pacific he let go. Then he opened the mountains with roiites leading 
to not yet pacified lands, and he settled, on the last as far as the sea, 
&c. The She Ki of Szema Ts'ien, from where we extract the state- 
ment, goes on with the names of the places that where supposed to 
have formed the limits of the empire of Hwang-ti within China 
proper. 

346. Although the whole story is one of glorification, one cannot 
fail to notice the subdued tone with which some parts of it are told. 
The presence near the Hien-yuen prince of an officer representing the 
suzerain king, successor of Shennung, shows that some arrangement 
had been made with the latter after the war, which therefore could not 
have been concluded by a victory so complete as some interpreters 
wanted it to have been. Furthermore, nothing is said of the reasons, 
probably overwhelming, that afterwards compelled the leader of the 
Baks to open the mountains with routes to yet not pacified lands, and 
settle in China. The historian in his patriotism could not clearly 
understand that Hwang-ti and his followers had not always inhabited 
the Middle Kingdom, 1321 although as far as the latter country is con- 
cerned, the first fifty years of his reign were a blank. 



320 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

347. The recit calls for some more remarks. It is astonishing 
to see how closely the account preserved by the Chinese coincides with 
the circumstances and events, geographical and personal, of the history 
of anterior Asia for the time indicated by the tradition. Several 
equations of names in brackets and some of the notes may have per- 
mitted to grasp a part of the facts, as we understand them. A further 
consideration discloses some more coincidences and suggest strongly 
that through the dim of ages, oral tradition and legendary exaggerations 
of later times, the recit really refers to a genuine period of 
primitive history of the Bak Sings in Anterior Asia. A sim- 
ilar concatenation of circumstances and proper names on the 
two sides form indeed a strong body of evidence. We know 
from the Babylonian sources that Chaldean suzerainty over the 
border lands of the East was at that time at a low ebb. A 
powerful king then arose in Elam ; his name was Kudtir Nakhunte (i.e., 
Servant of Nakhimte, the Elamite Chief God), and he made a successful 
campaign against Chaldea, then held by the successors of Sargon, 
either by regular descent or more probably in chronology only. This 
was before 2285 B.C., while Sargon as stated by the Cylinder of 
Nabonidus had reigned about 3800 B.C. The lapse of time between the 
two dates (1465 years) answers admirably to the seventy reigns spoken 
of by the Chinese tradition. In 2285 Kudur Nakhunte returned in Elam, 
carrying away to Susa, as one knows, a much venerated statue of the 
goddess Nana and other spoil. A part of the land remained in his 
power, but the kingdom he had established there was captured not 
many years later by Khammurabi, who first united all Babylonia under 
his sway. These circumstances, which belong to written history, suggest 
forcibly the event which the Chinese account has left untold. The 
coinciding dates have been written on the two sides thousands years 
ago, and no interference or correction of a European hand has been 
required to make them concur.i325 

348. In 2285 Kudur Nakhunte, King of Elam, comes back victorious 
to his capital, after an expedition which, however successful, must have 
taken a certain lapse of time. In 2282, Hu Nak Kunte, chief of the 
Baks, in the fiftieth year of his reign, arrives on the banks of the Loh 
river in South Shensi, and oft'ers a sacrifice. The Chinese account 
shows that the chief of the Baks, inflated by the success^ a over the 
Tsabs, in which he appears as the leading spirit, had assumed the 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 821 

Imperial authority, and therefore thrown over any suzerainty. The 
return to Susa of Kudur Nakhunte, whose name he had imitated, 
must have frightened him, as the victorious Elamite would not have 
permitted the existence on his borders of a rival sovereign. Hu Nak 
Kunte, Yu Nai Hwang-ti, must therefore have migrated then with some 
of his followers, either on their own accord for fear of reprisals, or 
perhaps only after having been threatened with war in case they would 
not withdraw. Anyhow no actual fight seems to have happened, but 
the migration took place nevertheless. Hu Nak Kunte was accom- 
panied with a certain number, apparently some twelve or fifteen, of 
the Bak tribes. Amongst them were some Ketsa (whose name crippled 
in course of time is now read Sha and Hia), belonging probably 
to the Kassi or to the Kashtu once inhabiting the same region as 
the Baks in Anterior Asia.^326 

349. The route which they followed in their migration was not 
for them a matter of choice. It could be but in a north-east direction, 
as this quarter was the only one where they could make good their 
escape, and where they could go in search of desirable lands to 
establish new settlements. It was that which some of them knew best 
from their former experience of traders. Therefore the highest pro- 
babilities are that they followed the trade route leading to the mines ^ 
of Khorasan, Badakshan, and Eastern Turkestan (sect. 332). The 
probability becomes almost a certainty with the additional evidence 
derived from the written symbols of the cardinal points which they 
had learned like the other characters of the writing from the Chaldeo- / 
Elamites. The signs for south-west or front, and the north-east or 
back, of the diagonal orientation of the Sumero-Akkadian became 
forcibly for the tribes migrating to the north-east, those for Back and 
Front, and have remained so to the present day.^^^*" 

350. Meshed and Baktra further east are thus indicated as the two 
first principal stations of the emigrants ; from the latter place the Upper 
Oxus leading by Badakshan and Wakhan over the Pamir to the 
Chichiklik or the Kandar pass form the natural route between Khorasan 
and Eastern Turkestan, through which the Tarym valley and the 
celebrated jade mines are reached (see note 1291). Let us remark 
here that cuneiform inscriptions have been seen in Bactria and appar- 
ently also in the Wakhan country, while cuneiform cylinders have 
been discovered near the Pamir. i328 Their respective dates are still 



322 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

unknown, and we ignore if they are older, contemporary, or later than 
the migration of the Baks, but their existence confirms most positively 
that the route in question has been followed since remote antiquity.i329 

Notes — 

1307) Cf. A. H. Sayce, Records of the Past, n.s., iii., siv. 

1308) See our sections 321-9. 

1309) The existence, hitherto unknown, of tin beds and ancient 
mines near Meshed, discovered only a few years ago, is a most im- 
portant fact for the history of bronze. They have been discovered 
at Utshan-mien-abot, 20 farsangs, and at Raboji, Askaband, 6 far- 
sangs, distance from Meshed, by P. Ogorodnikow. Cf. Baer, Archiv, 
/. Anthrop., ix., 265. 

1310) The inscriptions discovered at Seripul, near the old Lulubi, 
are amongst the oldest hitherto deciphered, and older than those of 
Gudea. Sargon long before had conquered Elam. Cf. B. & 0. R., 
V. 272, Cuneiform Inscriptions near the Pamir, vi., 168, and W. St. 
Chad Boscawen, The Elamite orir/in of Chinese Civilisation, vii, 17. 

1311) Cf. T. de L., The Black Heads of Babylonia and ancient China, 
1892; Tapered Heads in Anterior Asia and Earhj China. B. 0. R., 
vi., 193-6, and 264 ; and on modern times, cf. Les Deformations 
Crdniennes en Chine, by Dr. Ernest Martin : Revue d'Ethnographie, 
1883, p. 504-6. Dr. A. B. Meyer, in 1881, has published an impor- 
tant monograph, Ueber J^unstlich deformirte Schlidel von Borneo und 
Mindanao, nebst Bemerhimgen ueber die vcrhreitunri der sitte der Kiinst- 
lichen Schadel-deformiruwj, Dresden, dealing with the question in 
general. 

1312) Cf. Add. 54, and note 1249. 

131.3) The identification of the legend of Sargon with that of Shennung 
is at present a fact for all those who have taken the trouble of 
studying the question. Cf. the references, siipra note 127, and also 
T. de L., TJw Loan of Chaldeo-Klamite Cidture to Early China, 1892, 
par. 34-44 ; W. St. Chad Boscawen, The Elamite Oriyin of Chinese 
Civilisation, 1893 ; B. & 0. R., vii., 17. Tchwang-tze of the 
fourth century B.C., says that 0-ho-Kam (Orkham?) had received 
the same lessons as Shennung. Cf. T.P., 78, 6 r. There was a 
tradition that the Hien-yuen chief lived three hundred years, which 
we understand as meaning that the chieftainship lasted that lapse 
of time. But the Chinese compilers could understand only that 
Hwang-ti, the Hien-yuen chief, was referred to, and an explanation 
was difficult. The Ta Tai Li, or Ritual of the Elder Tai, of the 
first century B.C., attributed to Confucius the following : " Hwang- 
ti reigned 100 years, his people mourned for him 100 years, and 
venerated him another 100 years, hence 300 years " (T.P , 79, 4), 
which is more convenient than genuine and conclusive Seven 
names of rulers are given before Hwang-ti as having raled 306 



u 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 828 

years. Cf. also Kia-yu, v. 22 v. On the other hand let us remem- 
ber the 300 winters of the Zend Avesta (edit. J. Darmesteter, 
ii., 21). 

1314) The denomination of Hieii-yuen, or Kom-the-long-robed, was 
perhaps assumed only at the beginning of Kung-sun's reign. 
The TchuJi shu ki nien says that he invented then the cap with 
pendents and the robes to match. 

1315) Eight names of Shennung-ites, including Dumanri, appear on 
the Chinese list of mythical kings in the same order as in cuneiform 
lists of Sumero-Akkadian and Kassite names of kings, which were 
first deciphered by T. G. Pinches in 1882, and published again by 
A. H. Saycein 1883 and 1888. Unhappily the fragmentary condition 
of the cuneiform tablets, where no headings remain, does not permit 
us to know where these kings ruled, nor how the names are arranged 
in the lists. 

1316) Tchi-iju, anc. Tehi-vu, which may be translated s t u p i d-and- 
extraordinary, has thus all the appearance of a transcription 
of a foreign word. If the assimilation, I suggest, could be proved, 
many difficulties would disappear as the name would be simply an 
appellative as its repetition shows. Tctii-vu^^Tsa-bu. 

1317) Cf. the wolvgs, tjgers, dragons, dogs, eagles, flijs, wasps,\ 
horses, &c. of Anterior Asia, in Kawlinson, voL i., ^3, 700, iij_., 
546 of his Herodotus. On the names of animals amongst the Sings, 
cf. H. A. Giles, Historic China, p. 363. 

1318) The statement here is interesting because it shows that the 
Shennung-ite king was not thoroughly vanquished and destroyed. 
The various readings of the tradition are the following .• Szema 
Ts'ien: " and after he obtained his will," Ta Tai Li, "after that 
he carried on his will ; Hwang P'u Mi : he subdued him." The 
battle of Fan-tsiuen is referred to in the Tso-tchuen, v., xxv. 

1319) Ta hung was a title of officer, not a personal name. Hwang- 
ti himself was at a time called Ti Hung She, the Emperor Hung 
{Ti u-ang She Ki : T. P., 79, 2). He is thus mentioned in 609 B.C. 
in the Tso tchuan, Wang Kung, xviii. 9. Kwei-yii Kiu who appears 
to have come to China with Hwang-ti, and whose funeral mound 
was said to be near present Fung-tsiang, in south-west Shensi, was 
titled Ta Hung, hence the name of Hung Mung for his tomb [She 
Ki xxviii. 13 v. and 33). One officer of Yao had the same title 
{K'ang-hi tze tien, s.v. htmg, 196 + 6). It means the G re a t Wild 
Swan, 

1320) These various names will probably yield interesting disclosures 
when properly studied. The Great Mountain Reverer and the 
Demons' Classifier speak for themselves. The most interesting is 
perhaps the Slien-nung hn-ang tchih, Shennung's imperial straightt^wrr, 
who seems to have been a sort of controller representing the 
authority of the Shennung-ite King. His mission to the Chief 



324 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

Tchi-vu, and the qualified victory of the Hien-yuen Prince before 
explain the position which he occupied. 

1321) Szema Ts'ien, She Ki, i. 3, in his precise account does not 
mention the previous organisation nor these details. He says 
simply : Tchi-yu made disorder and did not acknowledge the 
imperial command ; thereupon Hwang-ti collected his army and the 
princes, fought against Tchi-yu in the plain of Tchoh-lu ; he pursued, 
seized, and killed Tchi-yu." Szema Ts'ien, ibid., speaks of Fung-hou 
Lih-muh, Tang tiev, and Ta Hung, who were raised to be superin- 
tendents of the people, when Hwang-ti was settled in his (new) 
dominion. Fung-hou, Prince of the Wind, seems to correspond to 
Fung-hu, Appointed dew-lapj><?(/, Fung-Kii, Appointed Noble, is 
mentioned also in the She Ki, but in the Kiv. 28, fol. 44, with 
Fong-hou. 

1322) Yh Tchou shu : T. P., 162, 6 v. Kivei-tsang. Ti Wang She Ki. 
Shan Hai King, xvii. 3 r. 

132:5) Yu Nai, Hu Nak, is said by the Tchu shu ki 7iien to be where 
/ he resided when king. The Ku She K'ao says it was his name as 

cUl^f, Yu Nai she ; so says the Ti Wang She Ki. Cf. T. P., 
79, 1 v., 2v. 

1324) And it is not at all unlikely that in reproducing the terms of 
the tradition of oldest times concerning the migration, the Chinese 
historian did not grasp their meaning to their original and full 
extent. 

1325) The date of 2285 has been given by Nabonidus. That of 2282 
for the first event of the reign of Hwang-ti in China, has been given 
by Hwang-p'u mi, one of the greatest archeologists China has ever 
produced, in the third century. 

1326) On Kutche-Ketsa = Shaz=Hia. Cf. The Languages of China 
before the Chinese, § 202. J. Oppert, La Lanqxie Cissienne on Kassite, 
non Cosseenne : Zeits. f. Assyr. 1888, iii. 421-3. The Tapered Heads 
in Anterior Asia and Early China: B. 0. R., Mar., 1893, vi. § 7. 
I have pointed out that the people vanquished by Eannada, of the 
country of Ish-ban or Kashtu (Brunn. List, 9100), with tapered 
heads may have been the ancestors of the civilisers of China. 



c 



1227) Cf. From Ancient Chaldea and Elam to Early China: sections 
25-29. B. and 0. R., Febr., 1891. 

1328) Cf. Cuneiform Inscriptions near the Pamir: B. and 0. R., vi., 
168. When the Yu Kung was compiled intercourse existed with 
the country of Kii'i-su, later Fei-kan or Wakhan. Cf. add. 1187. 

1329) The Puh-Tchou shan, anciently Put-dzok shan, cf . Badsakshan, 
famous in the Chinese legend of the deluge, was placed in the north- 
west {Shan Hai King, ii. 13). According to the geographers of the 
Han period, this mountain was in the north-west of the Kwen-lun, 
and near the country of Khotan {ibid, comm.) which is not far from 
the truth. Modern Badakshan. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 325 

II. — From tlie Jade Mines to South M'est Kansiih. 

'651. Once arrived to the jade mines, Hwang-ti is said^''^^ to have 
talien there some beautiful pebbles^^si of jade from Mit, where white 
jade is abundant and where its eflfluvium produces dark jade fa curious 
statement which reminds us of the white and black jade found there 
by modern travellers.) ^332 He carried them away with him to the 
south of Mount Tchunt/^^^^ (where he settled afterwards, as we shall 
see below). 

Continuing their journey, the emigrants must have followed the 
Yarkand daria, as we find them arriving next to the country of Ihca sii 
(west of Yen-tchou or Karashar, and north-west of Hoh tchou, the 
meeting place of ancient travellers, modern Kurla), which was most 
probably near the present Kutcha.i334 They came after to the country 
of the Yao Min further east, where they sojourned some time, for the 
tradition has preserved the memory of a station of Hwang-ti there. ^^sa 

352. At a short distance eastward they reached the residence of 
the Kam-mu (Wang Mu, a western sovereign), from whom Hwang-ti 
received some rings of agate or white jade and some (?) maps of the 
country.^336 Wg hsLve seen in previous pages that the country in 
question was on the west of Karashar. 

Following the southern course of the Tarym, afterwards the Bulunghir, 
and the north slopes of the Altyntagh range, they arrived near the 
Nan- Shan, and there we are told,i337 east of the Drifting Sands and 
west of the (head water of the) Black River, or Bulunghir, where the 
countries of the Tchou Yun, Morning Clouds, and of the Se-Tche, 
Rearing S w i n e s, where Hwang-ti married Lei-tsu,^^^^ who 
became the mother of Tchang-y, were situated. The region in 
question would be right south-west of An-si fu in Kansuh. Further 
east they stopped at the Red River. A legend has been based on 
the circumstance that Hwang-ti ascended a hill of the Kuenlun range, 
north of the upper course of that river to look about the route. ^^sa 
Near this Red River, according to the description of its course in 
ancient books, was the Hunii shiii (same meaning) of the present day, 
which rises from the mountains, south of Suhtchou of Kansuh west, 
and flows north.i^^o The chief of the Bak families went on a hill near 
its upper course, and obtained some information on the route from an 



326 ORIGIN OF THE EAKLY 

old man there. ^2*1 Their march was impeded further on by some 
warlike tribes, the K^t of White Tek race, and the Kin-pei, who 
attacked them from the south and killed some of them. 

353. Being thus prevented from seeking a route right south-east 
to the coveted pastures of the Flowery Land, the Hwang-tites followed 
east the north slopes of the Tc/mni/shan, i.e., the Nan Shan range, ^342 
where are at present Kantchou and Liangtchou. It was there that 
Hwang-ti could take his revenge against the Kii and Kin-pei, and 
destroy them, near the Yao hills.is*^ From the region of the present 
Liangtchou, it seems that the immigrants followed the natural route 
by Lantchou and Ti-tao, as they finally arrived to Kung-shan, later 
Kung-tchang-fu. of the south-west of Kansuh, where they established 
their central quarters. The site was well chosen, being partly sur- 
rounded by high hills, and thus well protected from unforeseen 
attacks. It was there that Hwang-ti founded his Chinese kingdom, 
known in legendary histpry by the name of Hien-^ji mi-K u-oh .-^344 3,^^ 
^ it is there also that unto the present day, Chinese have venerated some 
tumuli as the tombs of their earliest leaders. 1^45 

The Bak families had thus been two or three years on the way 
since their departure from their original settlements in West Asia, 
but one year only from the west of Karashar. The probable date of 
their arrival was 2282 B.C. 

Notes — 

1330) Shan Hai Kiny, kiv. ii. f. 13-4. 

1331) Yxiwj 5984 instead of 4422, Bas. Mount Mit reminds us of 
Mount Mirdjai, all of jade at 230 li of Yarkand. Cf. Description de 
la Chine Occidentale, trad, Gueluy ; Museon, Juin, 1885, p. 312. 
The same mount is called Miritan, in the Si yu wen kian tu, k. 2, 
f. 15 V. It was at proximity of Pu-tchou-shan or Badakshan. 

1332) Supra note 1292. 

1333) This legendary statement of the existence of jade there, which 
existence was unknown of the later Chinese is most remarkable, as 

^ nephrite-jade has indeed been found in the Nan Shan by European 
travellers. Cf. P. Martin C. II. Ac. Sc, Paris, 1891, cxii, 1153, 
H. Fischer, M. Anthr. Ges. 1879, 50 ; A. B. Meyer, Xeiie r,eitraf/e 
zur Kenntniss des Nephrit nnd Jadeit, Berlin, 1891, p. 12. Cf. also 
Marco Polo on the river of Peih, edit. Yule, i. 198. 

1334) Lzeh-tze, kiv. ii., where it is made the occasion of an alleged 
dream. Cf. also the remarks of Hwai-nan-tze on the subject. 
T. P. Y. L., 79, 4 V. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 827 

1335) Shan Hai King. T. P., 178, 8. On the Yao Min, cf. Shan 
Bai King, 7, 8 ; 16, 2 v. 

1336) Sui yng tu : T. P., 872, 12. Tsih sien luh: Kin ting ku kin t'u 
shu tsih tcheng. 

1337) Shan Hai King, xviii. 1 v. 

1338) The own legend of Lei tsu, says only that she was a girl of 
the West Ridges, which is correct from China. T. de L., The Silk 
Goddess of China and her Legend, par. 46. 

1339) Tchwang-tze, Nan hwa tcheng king, xii. 4. The Shan Hai 
King, xi. 3, says that it flows into the Nan hai (a lake) east of the 
Yen hwo, or Fire Mountains, therefore near the Tien Shan range. 

1340) Shan Hai King, xi. 3 ; xvi. 4 r. All this will be explained 
more fully in my Historg of Chinese Cinlisation. The most impor- 
tant identification are those of the Joh shut, or Weak Water, with 
the river of Kantchou, eastern affluent of the Etsinai ; Red Water, 
with the Hung shui and Tolai river; Black Water, with the 
Bulunghir. 

1341) The route tao upon which Hwang-ti enquired there has been 
understood by the Neo-Taoists as referring to their own tao, and 
Kwang-tchen-tze, the old man in question, has been supposed by them 
to have taught their doctrines to Hwang-ti. The mountain was 
called Kung-tung. It has been identified with one of the hills of 
the Nan shan range, south of Suh tchou, and a monument has been 
built there in ancient times. Cf. the Tchu Shui King, in T. P. Y. L., 
44, 3. 

1342) For the ancient Chinese the Kuen-lnn embraces the Altyn tag 
range and the mountains south of it, all westwards ; the Tchung 
shan included the Xan shan, Ala shan, and YMs/taH ranges, extending 
from the Kuenlun to the north of China. The point of junction 
appears to be south of Suhtchou. 

1343) Shan Hai King, ii. 14-15. Pao Kiang, or Tsu Kiang, is the 
name given in the legend, as that of the principal of the followers 
of Hwang-ti who had lost their life. About the Tchung shan, cf. 
supra § 351 and note 1333. 

1344) Szema Tsien, She Ki, i. 4 ;;. Shan Hai King, vii. 3 ; xvi. 3 v. 
Ti Wang She Ki, &c. The legend says that this state, i.e., that 
settlement, lasted 800 years, i.e., until the country was occupied by 
the Tchou-ites. The name of Hien yuen, which we have already 
met, and which means Kom-the-long-rohed (sjyj. 348), explains the 
saying hitherto unclear of olden times, that it was sufficient that 
Hwang-ti, Yao, and Shun should wear their long robes for every- 
thing to be in order in the empire (cf. Yh King, Hi-tse, ii. 16). 

1345 Suh Han shu, Kiun Kwoh tchi : T. P., 165, 1 v. Szema Tcheng, 
Wu Ti pen ki. Hwang P'u-mi. Hou Wei Feng tu ki : T. P , 44, 3. 
Tchu Kung Yang, Lih tai ling ts'in pei k^ao. Grosier, De la 
Chine, i. 162. 



328 origin of the early 

From South-West Kansuh to South Shansi. 
{Circa 2282-2275 B.C.) 

354. Yu-nai Hwang-ti, as principal leader of the emigrants, was 
the first, with a portion of his followers, who penetrated south as far 
as the present Kung-tchang fu. From there he was enabled without 
delay to advance eastward along the north side of the valley of the 
Wei river as far as the Loh which flows into the Hwang-ho,i346 near 
the mouth of the Wei itself. Arrived there in the fiftieth year of his 
reign, 1347 i^e was greeted by the appearance of phoenixes, the bird of 
good omen, and he offered a sacrifice. There also cupules, or cup- 
marks, graven on the cliff by former inhabitants, were then discovere d 
and being looked upon as a divine script, have become the Loh sku of 
the legend. 1348 Several years, probably seven, were then spent by 
Hwang-ti in establishing in his new country his final settlements, 
government and imported civilisation. i349 

355. Another portion of the Bak Sings, perhaps the bulk of them, 
had remained behind and settled along the Nan shan range on the 
south-east, from the present Kan-tchou fu to the north of Kung-tchang 
fu. They were under the command of Tsing-yang, titled Shao-hao, 
elder son of Hwang-ti by his first wife.i350 During his government of 
some thirty years there, in the name of his father, gold was discovered 
at Ku-icu (Liang-tchou) and at Kang (Kin tchen or gold city, of Lan- 
tchou). Several native tribes submitted,i352 and pitchers in agate 
were brought from Tan Kiu (Turfan).i3''>3 Shao Hao was venerated in 
after times {i.e., 669 B.C.) as the White Ti (Regent of the White 
West), who had ruled by the virtue of gold.i354 

{Circa 2275-2255 B.C.) 

356. Two native populations of unusual aspect, reported themselves 
to Hwang-ti, in his 59th year. Their names Kwan-hixin(j and Tchang- 
ku, which have been taken in their proper sense of " Pearced-breasts " 
and " Long Legs," by the mythological ethnology of the Shan Hai 
Hin<j^^^^ refer to peculiarities less momentous than that ; such for 
instance as tatooing and the use of tooth picks'^^n in the one case, and 
a real appearance of long legs in the other, i^s? These tribes were 
probably in Honan. There was also a tradition that some southern 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 329 

tribes had presented a white deer and some aromatic liquor. But these 
legendary statements are beyond our possibility of investigation. 

357. It was in these years that took place the unsuccessful and 
fabled expedition of Hwang-ti to the north of Shansi and in Tchihli. 
Marching northwards in the east of Shensi, beyond the present Sui- 
teh department where he had a regular settlement, the chief of the 
Bak Sings crossed the Hwang-ho, probably by the north ford^^^^ (be- 
tween Fu-kuh of Shensi and Pao-teh of Shansi), and proceeded east 
in north Tchihli, where he founded a city.^^^^ Then he is reputed to 
have gone to the sea-shore, where he caught some kweis, or sea-oxen, 
from whose skins he made drums. ^^•^'^ From there he advanced south 
to the site of the later Yung-tcheng (present Sin-'an hien in Pao-ting 
fu of C. Tchihli) where he organised the calendar ;i2^i hence he came 
further south as far as Ta Kwei in Kiii-tze (later Kiii-tchou, present 
Shun teh fu, S. Tchih-li), where numerous spirits and demons were 
worshipped. 1362 g^^ ]^q could not advance any further, nor remain 
there, as he was attacked by some Tchi-yii or Tchi-vus enemies^^^^ as 
far back as his new city. A version of the legend says that with the 
help of the goddess of Drought, Pat, whom he invoked for that purpose, 
he could withdraw with his followers. He returned by Mount Shao- 
hien, next to the ford of the Ho, and near there he saw Ya-yiihs, 
dragons (sort of alligators), which were caught for him by an officer 
named Ni-fuh ; he brought them back to his settlements of Mount 
Shu shuk, near the present Sui-teh.i^'^^ 

358. So much of mythology has grown over the events that it is most 
difficult to discriminate the substratum of truth in the circumstance. 
Tchi-vti the common appelation of the first enemies of the Bak Sings on 
their north, as we have seen previously, was used again in this instance 
as also later on at the time of Tchuan-hiiih ; and the assumption that 
it was the personal name of a single individual has thrown a good deal 
of confusion into these legends which consequently have not been 
clearly distinguished one from the other as they ought to have been. 
TrhoJt-lu did not exist in ancient Chinese geography ;^^^^ it has been 
repeated from one legendary account to another, and it is only during 
the Han dynasty when geographical localisations for ancient stories 
were sought for in China proper, that the name was erroneously sup- 
posed to have existed in the present Tchihli in high antiquity, simply 



830 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

because a concatenation of legendary traditions pointed out to a tem- 
porary sojourn of Hwang-ti in that region. When the historical 
legend of this new encounter of Hwangti with Tehi-vus was restored 
and developed by the compilers, they supposed most conveniently but 
most erroneously that there was only one such encounter, and they 
have arranged the story accordingly ; furthermore they appear to have 
worked, having in their mind, a Persian legend which we quote in 
another page (add. 153). 

359. In the 77th year of Hwang-ti 's reign, or 2255, his second 
son, Tchang-y, was sent on the Joh river of north-west Szetchuen to 
establish a colony. This is the first intimation of the natural route 
famous in later ages and followed to the present day which connects 
Kun-tchang fu to Lin-tao, present Min-tchou, to Si ku tcheng, Sung- 
pan ting and the north west of Szetchuen (note 919). He married 
there a native princess named Tchang-Pu (of Shan race), who bore 
him Kao-yang, the future Tchuan-hiuh. The local tradition wants 
him to have gone as far south as Kwan-hien, west of Tcheng-tu. But 
he proved incapable in his government, which means that he was 
driven back by the natives, and little more is heard of him in 
history. 

Notes — 

1346) This river was the Loh tchneyi of the modern maps, and not the 
Loll ho, of later historical importance, which flows into the Hwang 
ho near Honaii fu. 

1347) Tchuh sJm M nien, I., i. 3. The fiftieth year is the date com- 
monly accepted, but some editions give the fifty-seventh year. The 
latter figure would make the whole length, or 100 years of the reign 
of Hwang-ti, with the forty-three years alluded to by Lieh-tze, 
kiv. ii. (T. P., 79, 4 r.) There was a tradition that after a period 
of fifteen years of difficulties in his government, Hwang-ti had ruled 
in peace twenty-eight years more. The seven years after the sacri- 
fice should thus have been spent in organisation. 

1348) Yh King, Hi tse, i. 73. Shui King, T. P., 62, 5. On these 
cup-marks, cf. my Beginnings of writing, sections 33, 227. 

1349) We shall resume the most important items of that civilisation, 
sections 383-389 below. An important geographical statement in 
in the legendary accounts on the subject is that Hwang-ti com- 
manded his officer Ling-lun to get bamboos from the country lying 
in the west of Ta Hia, and arrange the system of modulated sounds. 
Cf. Lm she Tchun tsiu, of the third century B.C. The 7a Ilia of 



OHINESK CIVILISATION. 331 

that time was the present Ho tchou in Lan tchou fu of south-west 
Kansuh. The text of Liu she says : on the north of the Kuen-lun, 
or of Yiian yu (cl. 85 + 375-5075 Bas). Cf. T. P., 656, 6 v.; 963, 3. 
Cf. however § 298 and note 1193 supra on the possibility of another 
Ta Hia. 

1350) Shao Hao was son of Hwang-ti by the first in date of his four 
wives, Niu-tsieh of the Fang-lei family. Cf. Pan ku, Tsieti Han 
Shu, Ku kin piao. Ti ivaufi she ki. T. P., 79, 8 and 135, 7 v. 
Szema Ts'ien, She Ki, i. 5, has mistaken the first wife in rank for 
the first wife in date, and thus made Shao Hao the son of Lei- 
tsu, which the sequence of events does not permit. 

1351) Km tchou yao ki. Han tchi. T. P., 165, 2 ; 50, 3. Gold 

is obtained still at present from the sand of most of the streams 
and rivers of Shensi and Kansuh, especially near Lan-tchou. Cf. 
A. Williamson, Journeys in North China, i. 170 ; and W. W. 
Rockhill, The Land of the Lamas, 46. 

1352) A curious legend has crept in with reference to Shao Hao 
and to native tribes of Pongs, which unhappily I have recorded, 
supra p. 46. See the rectification, add. 216. 

1353) Shih y ki : T. P., 808, 3. 

1354) She Ki, v. 5; xiv. 14, 19 v; xxviii. 3, 8 v. Also supra 
section 153, note 538, and add. 538. 

1355) Tchuh shu ki nien, I., i. . Shan Hai King, vi. 3; vii. 4. 

1356) Cf. T. de L , The Negrito Pygmies of Ancient China, 15, 16. 
The use of tooth-picks among the natives of Indo-China when re- 
ported by early travellers has given rise to a fable of the same kind. 
A legend in the Kwa-ti-tu explained the denomination of the 
Pierced-breasts by the circumstance that two of the ancestors had 
once committed suicide in piercing themselves with swords. Cf. T.P., 
790, 2 V. 

1357) Cf. for instance Dr. Thorel, in Voyage d' Exploration en Indo- 
Chine, ii. 317, on such a peculiarity among the Mois, Penongs, and 
Khas of Indo-China. Mr. A. H. Savage Lindor, Alo7ie with the 
Hairy Ainu, 1893, p. 300-4, shows by Anthropological measurements 
the great length of the arms of Ainu race. 

1358) There is another ford more south with a route from Tai-yuen, 
but it can be used only by travellers on foot. Mount Shao-hien 
spoken of in the recit shows that it was by the north ford that the 
expedition crossed the river. 

1359) The name of Tchoh-lu (in memory of the similar name in the 
West ?) has been commonly mentioned as that of this town since 
the Han period when geographical localisations within the Chinese 
dominion have been sought for all the traditions of antiquity. If it 
has been done so after a genuine tradition, we must confess our 
complete ignorance about it. Several traditions pointed out to a 
temporary appearance of Hwang-ti in that part of the land, but this 
is all. The name in question was given only during the Han 



332 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

dynasty to a locality in Shan Kiii kiun, near present Pao-'an of 
Tchih-li, north-west of Peking. 

1360) Near Liu-po shan on the shores of the Tung-hai or Eastern 
Ocean. Shan hai Kim/, xiv. 5 i'. Hwang P'u mi : T. P., 8'J9; i, 
582, 4. 

1361) Shi pen: T. P., 16, 7 v. The geographical name has been 
taken as that of an officer of Hwang-ti from that circumstance. 
There is about the first making of a calendar by Hwang-ti an 
interesting tradition which shows the foreign origin of Hwang-ti's 
knowledge, in Szema Tsien, i. 4 and, xxviii. 43. He says that 
Hwang-ti had acquired (by conquest or otherwise is not said, but 
the word kwoh. 9860 Bas. suggests the first), a precious tripod, and 
that he observed the sun, yng jeh, and arranged accordingly the 
lists, or written tablets (t'ui ts'eh) that were in or on that tripod. 
The latter circumstance is suggested by a spurious legend, kiv. 28, 
fol. 32, when the J 9-year cycle is attributed to Hwang-ti, but where 
the circumstance above referred to as : Hwawj-tl teh pao twn shen 
ts'eh, i.e., that Hwang-ti got — the precious tripod and the mysterious 
tablets, or the mysterious tablets of the precious tripod. In western 
antiquity written texts on vegetable material were usually kept in 
pots or jars. 

1362) Ping, Duke of Tsin, 557-531 B C. ; She Kang ; Han Feitze : 
T. P., 79, 6. Tchwang tze, kiv. 24, T. P., 79, 5. This was the 
country of Kiu and Li, of which we shall hear again under the 
government of Shao Hao and the reign of Tchuan-hiuh. What 
sort of defeat this historical legend covers may be easily inferred 
from the result. 

1363) On that meaning of Tchi-vu, of. supra, note 1316, and below. 

1364) Cf. She Ki, i 3. Tchiih shu ki nien, i. 1. Shan Hai Kinq, 3, 
6; 10: 8; 11: 1, 2, 4; 12 : 1 ; 17 : 3, 4. Ti Wang She Ki : 
T. P., 79, 1, 2. Yuen ho Kiun hieu tu: T. P., 164, 10. The 
dragons, yah-yU, had dragon's heads and serpent's bodies ; mewling 
like children, they devoured the men they caught. Some lived near 
the Weak Water, as well as on the banks of the Ho. During Yao's 
reign, they were once so numerous that it was necessary to send 
archers to kill them. Cf. T. P. Y. L., 908, 4. 

1365) The Han shu, Ti li tchi, said that a Tchoh-lu hien had existed 
in high antiquity (near present Pao-'an, north-west of Peking), in 
the Tchoh Kiun, but other commentators have remarked that the 
statement was erroneous. Cf. comm. She Ki, i. 3. 

1366) She Ki, i. 5. Tchuh shu ki nien, I., i 5. Shuh Ki : T. P., 44, 
4, 5; 166,8. 

{Circa 2250 B.C.) 

360. The failures of Hwang-ti in the north and of Tchang-y in 
the south in their attempts at opening new lands, had left the Bak 
families limited chiefly to the west of the Hwang Ho. They had 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 333 

certainly multiplied during their thirty years of occupation, and it 
became imperatively to advance eastwards and find new grounds for a 
portion of them. It was Shao Hao who was the leader of the migra- 
tion, and his ox-waggons advanced forward through and between the 
native centres and states on the south of the Yellow river until he 
found lands suitable for a final settlement. 

Passing north of the native state of Yu Hit (Honan W.), they ad- 
vanced at first as far east as the banks of the Ti Kiawj (near Lu shan, 
C. W. of Honan). Thence continuing eastwards, they past south of 
the Yu Sin (west of Kai-feng fu) of the Yu Kivei (Kai feng fu), and 
through the country of the Trim Siany, with whom Shao Hao made a / 
treaty of alliance which permitted him to go further east ; then leaving 
the Shuh Ki (east of Kwei-teh) on the right, and the Tsao Junijs (Tsao 
tchou fu) on their left, they arrived to the hills of West Shantung, 
near which they founded Kiumi sanr/, the capital city of Shao Hao 
(modern Kiuh-fou, in Yen tchou). '^^^ 

Shao Hao remained there some thirty-seven years, and gradually 
strengthened his colony, without however aggrandizing his territory, 
as he was hemmed in all round by native states which he could not 
conquer. 

(Circa 2235-2232 B.C.) 

361. Hwang-ti, then a very old man, made three sorts of copper 
vases at Head-hill, Shou Shan, near Mount King (in Shang Loh, 
south-east Shensi), where he had found the metal.^^'^^ This was not 
long before his death, i369 which occurred after a reign of one hundred 
years. He was buried on a Mount Kiao in the north-east. of .Si- 'an 
fu.i37o After the death of his master, Tso-tch'ih, one of his officers, 
carved a wooden image of the deceased and covered it with his gar- 
ments^cap, and staff, that it should be venerated by all the officers 
and people J.^'^ 

(Circa 2225-2213 B.C.) 

362. Shao-Hao being too far away in the east, with defective 
intercommunications with the west, to exert any effective authority on 
the Bak families of Shensi, Tchuan Hiii-h, grandson of Hwang-ti, was 
elected chief in Kung-tchang, and ruled there for twelve years. i372 

Intercourse continued with the Tan Kiil country, or Turfan, and 
water pitchers in agate were imported again. i^rs 



334 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

(Cired 2213 B.C.) 

363. Shao-Hao had died eighty-four years old, after having 
governed portions of the Bak famiHes for many years, and without 
having ever been able to cross over to the left side of the Hwang-ho 
because of the enmity of the native Li tribes. He was buried at 
Kiuh fu (West Shantung), where a stone pyramid, unique in China, is 
still shown as his tomb.^^''"* 

Tchuan-Hiuh, his successor, removed from Kung-tchang to the east, 
and established his central quarters at Puh (present Puh-tchou north 
of Tsao-tchou), somewhat more east than those of his predecessor. 
He was then enabled to cross the Ho, then running north-east, and 
to extend the Chinese dominion to the north side of the river. He 
crushed the J^iu and the Li who had opposed Shao-Hao, and he is 
praised for having then upheld the religious principles of his ancestors. 
He conquered a part of Shansi as far north as Tai-lu, later Tai-yuen, 
and south-west of this region the native states of Tao, or Potters, and 
of Tany. 

Tchwan-hiiih was an energetic ruler who did much to enlarge the 
Chinese dominion in the east, and to secure the commvmications with 
the western province. About 2180 he subdued the native state of 
Yii Sill (west of Kai-feng fu) for that purpose, and c. 2147 he smashed 
the Shuh Ki, who had moved north and attempted to interfere with 
the works of damming the river which were going on since the reign 
of his predecessor because of local floods. 

[Circa 2147 B.C.) 

y 364. Ti Kuh Kao Sin,i379 great grandson of Hwangti, and heir 
associate since twelve years, at Poh, modern Kwei-teh fu, succeeded to 
Tchwan-hiiih. He married four wives from states on the borders of 
his dominion to strengthen his power, and he conquered several minor 
native princedoms. He employed a Tchung-li (anciently Txm(jU = 
Tengri,=hea ven in Tartar languages, therefore a foreigner), to 
describe the zodiacal stars and explain their time to the people. 

His son, Ti-Tchih, made heir associate in 2112, was disallowed nine 
years later, and Yao, another son of his by a native wife of West 
Shantung, was appointed in his stead. 

In 2085 he died and was buried near his predecessor. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 335 

{Circa 2085 B.C.) 

365. Ti Yao (heir associate since eighteen years) on his accession 
to the throne, established his capital at Ping-yang, in south 
west Shansi, and organised his government. He does not seem to 
have had any other title than Prince of T'ao and T'ang. In 2042 
B.C. occurred a great overflow of the Yellow River, which flooded a 
large track of land, principally the lands of the Li-min, corresponding 
to the present Tchang-teh fu, and the surrounding region {i.e., part 
of the country of the Li conquered by Tchuen-hiiih). Twenty three 
years of engineering work (ten under the superintendence of the great 
Yii) were spent before the course of the river was regulated again. 

In 2033, more by the force of circumstances than otherwise, Yao made 
alliance with Shun, a prince of the native state of Yii, yet independent, 
in south-west Shansi. He gave him his two daughters in marriage, 
and at the expense of his own son and heir, associated him to the 
supreme authority. This permitted the submission of several native 
states, and the final establishment of the Chinese dominion on the 
two banks of the Yellow River as far east as the west of present Shan- 
tung province. 

During his reign, intercourse continued with Karashar, and Hou-y, 
the Chief Archer, could get in 2076 from there some of the famous 
fir-balsam of asafoetida of the Si Wang Mu. 

366. We have thus followed the gradual advance of the Baks and 
their final settlement from the north-western borders of China to the 
centre of Shansi. And we have just seen the transmission of the 
supreme authority over the civilised Bak Sings of YAO to SmjN, which 
is an event of great importance in the history of the country. We 
can understand at present without difficulty how the joint control of 
the two rulers has come to be looked upon in the traditions as the real 
beginning of Chinese history. YAO, notwithstanding the native blood 
of his mother, was a genuine descendant and representative of the 
chieftains that had led the Bak tribes in the Flowery Land. SHUN 
on the contrary, was an indigenous prince, belonging to a family of 
native rulers in possession of a part of the country long before the 
arrival of the civilisers from the west. Their association closes the 
period of foundation of the Chinese dominion. 

Tradition has preserved the names of only the most important of 
the leaders of the Bak Sings at a time, and even these most important 



336 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

were contemporary for a certain extent. Shao-Hao was contemporary 
of Hwang-ti and of Tchwan-Hiiih. Ti Kuh was for twelve years 
contemporary of the latter, and he saw himself for eighteen years the 
rising authority of Yao. We have seen that the rulers of the Bak 
Sings in China were neither the ragged chieftains of straggling tribes, 
nor the glorious autocrats of a great empire, that they have been sup- 
posed to be. They were simply the chiefs of some intelligent tribes, 
as much civilised as their proximity to the old centres of civilisation 
in Anterior Asia had permitted them to be, and with as much 
knowledge of that western civilsation as they were able to preserve in 
distant lands and different surroundings. 

Notes — 

1367) Szema Tsien, i. 5. Ta Tai Li. Ti Warn/ she ki. T.P.Y.L., 
79, 8. Shan Hai Kin;i, 14, 1. All the names of native states here 
are found in subsequent history when they were subdued, viz., Yu 
sm before 2175 ; the Yu Kirei in 2145, she Shuli ki in 2147, the 
Tsao Junijs and Yu Hu in 2018. The treaty with the Tchu siawj is 
specially mentioned in the traditions. All the evidence shall be 
found in my large history. 

1368) Szema Tsien, She Ki, yixwni. 33; xii. 8 v. Tsien Han Shu: 
T. P., 813, 1 r. Sanq fu hwaru/ tu, iii. 8 v. Shan Hai ICinf/ Sind 
T. P. Y. L., 49, 1-2. ' 

1369) Liu shu, Wai Ki. 

1370) Tchuh shu ki nien, 1., i. . Szema Tsien, i. 5 c. Hwang 
Pu-mi : T. P., 79, 1-2. Lih tai ling ts'in pei k'ao, ii. 5 r. Another 
localisation in the same region, more north, was preferred during 
the Han dynasty, near Sui-teh, but was given up soon afterwards. 

1371) Tchuh shu ki nien, 1., \., note 8. Poh wuh tchi. T.P. Y.L., 

79, 7. 

1372) Tchuh shu ki nien, I., iii. Hwang Pu-mi, I.e. 

1373) Shih y ki: T. P., 808, 3. 

1374) Szema Tsien, i. 5. Ti Wamj She Ki : T. P., 79, 8. Tchu 
Kung-yang, Li tai lini/ ts'in pei k\to, iii., 1. A. Williamson, Journe>/s 
in North China, i., 234. How far the present monument represents 
faithfully the original one remains to be seen. 

1375) Tchtih shu ki nien, I., iii. 

1376) It must be remembered that the Hwang-ho was then running 
north-easterly where at present flows the Tchang river; cf. J. Legge, 
Chin. Class., iii. 135. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 387 

1377) The names of these tribes appear variously written Kiii, 619 
Bas., which has appeared in the account of Hwang-ti, Kiii, 51 Bas., 
and Li, 13125 Bas. ; the two latter have thus been wrongly sup- 
posed to mean the nine Li ; they were a population of husbandmen 
extensively addicted to Shamanism or spirit worship, between Lu-'an 
fu of south-east Shansi to Shun-teh fu of south-west Tchih-li. All 
sorts of erroneous theories have been built up on these simple facts 
because the geographical location had been overlooked. Traditions 
wanted the Kin and Li to have been ruled by a Tchi-yu who used 
to take metal for his weapons and mails at the Lu shan (near 
present Tsi-ning, West Shantung). Cf. Kwoh yu, Tsu ii ; A'linn-'an 
Kwoh : Legge, Chiji. Class., iii. 590, Kwan-tze : T. P., 810, 5 /•. 
Playfair, Cities and Towns, 2322, 4128, 4555; 4537, 655. The 
Tchuny mu M, by Hwang Kien, of the Tang period or before, says 
that a great tumulus, seventy feet in height, was looked upon as the 
tomb of Tchi-yu at Kwan-hiang town, Shou tchang hien, Tung ping 
kiun, West Shantung Sacrifices were offered to Tchi-yu in the 
tenth month, Cf. T, P., 875, 10. On such tumuli, cf. Tso tclmen, 
VII., xii. 3. There were in the vicinity several tumuli of Tchi-yus. 
Cf. comm, on She Ki, i, 3. The worship of Tchi-yu has continued 
to the present day. A red vapour in the. sky like a falling scarf, says 
Hwang Kien, or a sort of comet, says Szema Tsien, was called 
Tcki yu ki, or Tchi-yu's banner. Cf. T. P., 875, 10. 

1378) Tchuh shu ki nien, I., iii. 5, Hhan Hai Kiny xviii. 5-6. 

1379) The sources of the present and following sections are the 
Tclmh shu ki nien, Hwang P'u mi : Ti Wany She ki, Szema Ts'ien : 
She Ki and the Shu Kiny. 




338 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 



CHAPTER XI. 

Additions and Emendations of Preceding Chapters. 



Chapter III. 

367. The suggestion, page 5, that some of the Bak families migra- 
ting to the Flowery Land had branched off and passed northwards in 
the region of the Yenissei must remain a moot-point. The Chinese 
characters found near Abakansk, are cyclical signs in the tchuen style 
which may have been engraved there at any time in antiquity. Most 
of the Siberian inscriptions belong to the Pseudo-Runic style of com- 
paratively modern times, viz., from the sixth to the ninth century, 
which has nothing in common with the Chinese script. We have 
explained the matter in our Bef/innimjs of Writing, sections 32, 235, 
237-242. 

Chapter IV. 

368. Elements of Culture received by the Civilisation of China from 
Babylonia and Elam. Sciences and Arts. The discovery which I made 
during the printing of the present work, that traders of the Erythoean 
Sea frequented the coast of Shantung after 680 B.C. and imported into 
the Middle Kingdom some more Babylonian notions, has led me to 
reconsider carefully the provisory list pages 9-27 ; further recon- 
siderations resulting from fresh investigations have also touched them ; 
the result is that we must cease to claim an importation by Hwang-ti 
and his Bak families of the following items : twelve Babylonian 
months, astronomical instruments, 19-years cycle, colours of the planets, 
yn and yany, which were all introduced subsequently. On the other 
hand numerous additions which have to be made have been duly entered 
in the chronological lists. 



chinesk cmlisation. 335^' 

Additions and Emendations. 

24) On the ancient Chinese calculations of the year cf. two papers 
written by Dr. Fr. Kuhnert : Der Chinesische Kalender, nach Yao's 
Grundlagen und die wahrscheinlichste allmahliche Entwicklung 
und VerwoUkomnung desselben : in T'ouw/ pao, Avril, 1891, vol. ii- 
p. 49-80 ; and Heisst bei den Chinesen Jeder einzelne solar term auch 
tsiet k'i und ist ihr unsichtbarer Wandelstern k'i thatsJichlich unser 
sonnen cyclus von 28 julianischen Jahren : Z.D.M.G., 1890, vol. 44, 
f. 256-26(5. On the four divisions of the day, cf. Tso tchucn, ann. 541; 
Clmi. Class. V. 580; and on the six modes of dividing time, ibid., 
ann. 535 and p. 619. On the 24 tsieli in high antiquity, cf. the 
enquiry made by Yang Tsiuen, IVii Ii hoi, of our era. 

25) On the seventh day, cf. YJi Kin;/, kwa 24; also G. Schlegel, 
Uranoiiraphie CJtinoise, p. 645. 

25) The Tso tchuen, Duke Tchao, year vii. 1 {i.e., 585 B.C.) tells 
us that " as Heaven has its ten suns, men have their ten classes." 
Dr. J. Legge, CJiin. Class., v. 616, has translated : " the day has its 
ten divisions of time," which would be against the statement of our 
text about the 12 double-hours. But this translation is incorrect, and 
the statement must be understood in other ways. Tien yii shih jih may 
mean that heaven has its ten days, alluding to the denary cycle applied 
to the supputation of days, which was a fact as we know by the Shu 
King at the time of the great Yii. This view is that of seveiral com- 
mentators. Or it may be an allusion to the famous phenomenon of 
parhelions, or mock- suns, which is said to have occurred in the last 
year {i.e., c. 1737 B.C.) of YN-Kiah, otherwise Kiu, the thirteenth 
ruler of the Hia dynasty, when ten suns appeared in the sky (TchuJi 
shii ki nien, III., xiii. 8). A similar phenomenon was also attributed to 
the time of Y''ao. The ten suns affair is spoken of by Tchwang-tze, 
Hwai-nan-tze, Kiii-yuen, the Kwei-tsang's commentary, &c. On this 
event and a phenomenon of the same kind in Java, cf. G. Schlegel, 
ProbUmes Geor/raphiques I.; T'oung Pao, Mai, 1892, p. 115-6. On the 
other hand the most probable meaning is that which is explained in 
the Tcliou-li, xxiv. 30-31 ; tr. Biot, ii. 84, by the ten Jnvei, or light's 
influences, those which affect the sunlight in the sky. With reference 
to the above ten suns, let us remember that the Pythagoricians, such 
as Philolai'is, c. 450-375 B.C., believed in ten celestial bodies (sun, 
earth, planets, &c.) circulating in the sky around the central fire. 
Cf. J. Lieblein, Les Anciens Er/t/ptiens Connaissaient-ils le Mouvenwnt 
de la Terre .' (Congr. Provinc' Oriental, St. Etienne, 1880), p. 137. 
A Hindu symbol represents four suns on the trunk and branches of a 
tree. Cf. Creuzer-Guignaut, Si/wbolique, iv., pi. 2, fig. 16, and Cte 
Goblet d'Alviella, Les Arhres Paradisiaques, Bruxelles, 1890, p. 31. 

33) We may enumerate also : hundred, which was for them a standard 
number (sections 321-329) as among the Semitic Assyrians 
(Cf. A. H. Sayce, Hibb. Lect. p. 366). Avoidance of regular figures 
as ominous. Cf. J. Oppert, Soc Pliiloloi/ique, 1880, i. 55. A special 
bird of good omen, the fun(/, or phoenix (cf. the Egyptian bemiu). 



340 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

36) On the eight wands of fate, cf. Lenormant, Chaldcean Magic, 
pp. 237-8. 

39) The list of the ancient twenty-four lunar stations of Chaldea 
is given in C. I. W. A., v. 46; Fritz Hommel, Die Astronomie tier 
alien ChahUier, III., 1892, Sonderabdr. 4, 13. 

41) We cannot give more than a few names in this note to show that 
the earliest civilisers of China were acquainted with Babylonian 
names of stars: Aldebaran, pidnu Bab., pit Chin., yoke or net 
Great Bear, a chariot, Bab. Ch. ; Draco, an enclosure, Bab. Chin. 
Orion, military chief, Bab. Chin. ; Pleiades, mxil Bab., mao Chin. 
Polestar, star of God, Bab. Chin. ; Regulus, Royal Star, Bab. Chin. 
Sirius, Bow-star and Dog-star, Bab. Chin. ; Spica, Kri Bab., Kio 
Chin. ; &c. Cf. the Bibliography Note 1262 and G. Schlegel, Uranu- 
f/raphie Chinoise. 

42) Dr. John Chalmers, The Chinese Ch'ih Measure, 1885, has re- 
marked that once corrected of clerical errors which have crept into 
the text, the figures given by Szema Tsien of the twelve notes, 
correspond to those of the chromatic scale ; the matter being 
however theoretical as far as the bamboo tubes are concerned, 
because it is only applicable to strings. — Szema Tsien starts from 
the mystical measure of eighty-one units for his longest tube, as 
this number was then supposed to be full of special virtue, and had 
also been applied to the Calendar. Lu-Pu-wei, in the third century, 
had only said that thirty-nine was the difference between the longest 
and the shortest. Cf. T. P., 16, 1. Also the twelve strings of the 
harp at Tello : Perrot-Chipiez, Art Antique^ ii. fig. 291. 

44) Herewith a list revised to date of the old forms of the Chinese 
cycle of ten Kan with the Akkadian numerals : (1) Akk. //^ = 7v«/* 
Ch. (2) Akk. gash=et Ch. (3) Akk. bish^hinh Ch. (4) Akk. 
sMn=dinh Ch. (5) Akk. har^bau Ch. (6) Akk. 'ash=ket Ch. 
(7) Akk. ///w=Aam Ch. (8) Akk. «.ssrt (?)=s^w Ch. (9) Akk. ?7m = 
nhani Ch. (10) Akk. (iu=kivi. For the Akkadian cf. especially 
F. Hommel, Dei Sumero-Akkadische Sprache, and others, but there 
is no certainty about several of the names beyond five. The days 
were first reckoned by decades {Shu King, I. 8 ; III., iii. 1), and 
these ten numerals of Akkadian-like source were first used for 
denominating the days as shown by the Shu King, Yh tsih. The 
cycle of twelve derived from the names of the zodiac of sim.ilar 
source were, curiously enough, not used for months denominations, 
but for a years' cycle, and appears in connection with the cycle of 
ten to make the names of the sexagenary cycle applied to the days 
in the Shu King, IV., iv. 1, and in the Tchuh shu ki nien, iii. 4, i.e., 
in 1667 and 1904 B.C. It appears also under Hwang-ti in the 
latter work. 

45) The only cycle of twelve which must be mentioned here, since 
the full names of the months belong to the seventh century (cf. 
§ 10.5, note 890), is the zodiac which I have explained in The Zodiac 
and Cycles of Babylonia and their Chi)u'se derirati(m.s : Academy 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 341 

Oct. 11, 1890. Herewith the list with some additions: I. Bab. 
Offspring, TE=TU, mod. tze, child, Chin. II. Bab. Twins, 
MASH-MASH=f(7(t'w, manacles, Chin. III. Bab. A crab?, 
n a m g a r u = jem, yn, earthenware. Chin. IV. Bab. Water, 
son, ME==Mo, mao, springing, Chin. V. Bab. Growth? 
SHERU-TCHAN, tch'en, pregnant. Chin. VI. Bab. 
Empty? ZAB = SzE, exhausted, Chin. VII. Bab. A 
sting, GIR=GU, wu, a club? Chin. VIII. Bab. Leafy 
top of a tree, PA=VE, wei, upper sprout of a tree, Chin. 
IX. Bab. Sea-goat? SAHU = TZAN, shen, stretched, 
Chin. X. Bab. V e r f 1 w i n g, GU=HIU, ^m, a vase full. 
Chin. XL Bab. Threshold, ZIB=zSUH, guard, Chin. 
XII. Bab. Dog, kalbu, KU=HAI, a quadruped, Chin. In some 
cases the respective meanings could be improved by subsequent 
researches. For the meanings in Babylonian, cf. the works of 
Epping, Jansen, Brunnow, Sayce, and Chossat ; in Chinese the 
Sliwoh wan and Kwan<i-lu tze tien. In the above comparative list 
the numbers are those of the Chinese ; the Babylonian would be 
XIL, I., XL, III., &c., the twelfth of the latter corresponding to 
Taurus, and the first to Aries. This shows that the borrowing by 
the Bak Sings, or some intermediary, took place before the 
Babylonian revision of the Calendar (Note 1209). The date of this 
revision has not been ascertained, but Astronomy says that it 
cannot have taken place before 2540, and traditions in Greek 
authors point out to the twenty-third century. The oldest astron- 
omical observations sent by Kallisthenes from Babylon to Aristotle 
in B.C. 331 reached back to B.C. 2234 (Aristotle), or 2243 (Berosos, 
in Pliny). Ktesias (ap. Georg. Synk.) made the reign of Belos, "who 
first reigned over the Assyrians," and of whom Pliny remarks, 
" Inventor hie fuit sideralis scientise," last for fifty-five years from 
B.C. 2286 to 2231. It ought therefore to be under his reign that 
the revision of the calendar was made. Khammurabi who ruled 
fifty-five years about that time ought to be the sovereign in question, 
but Assyriologists disagree about his exact date. 

47) An instance of the cycle of 19 occurs in the Tso-tcJnien, V, v. 1, 
i.e., 655 B.C. Chin. Class., v. 144. Khang-hi tze tien, s.v. tvliamj, 
117, 6, f. 102 V. Also J. B. Biot, Astronomie Indienne et Chinoise, 
p. 47. It must be enumerated therefore among the astronomical 
notions introduced by the Erythroean Sea traders at Lang-ga and 
Tsih-moh. But it was not often utilised, and we see it again 
mentioned in 112 B.C. Cf. Szema Tsien, She Ki, kiv. 28, fol. 32, 
mixed in a legend of Hwang-ti. 

50) Prof. J. Oppert has communicated to the Academie des Inscrip- 
tions et Belles Lettres, 20 Sept., 1889, some proof of the decimal 
notation in cuneiform texts. 

52) The Chinese notion was that the sky was a vault (kai) revolving 
(hwan), and that the earth was square ifany) under it. While in 
Chaldea the sky was a vault revolving and the earth like an over- 
turned boat (which does not mean round nor circular). Cf. Dio- 



342 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

dorus Siculus, ii. 31. Fritz Hommel, Ber Babylonische Ursprung 
der Altijyptuchen Kultur, Munchen, 1892, p. 8. P. Jensen, Die 
Kosiiioloi/ie der Bahijlotiier, 1890, p. 10, 11, 160, &c. 

52) The Cosmic Egg appears also in China but in later times. 
{Several writers of the first centuries of our era describe the sky as 
the shell of an egg whose yellow in the centre is the earth. Cf. 
T. P., 2: 4 c, 8-9. 

54) The third series of Akkadian words found in China are those 
which have entered through intermediary and later channels. On 
this question and the relation of the Chinese and Sumero-Akkadian 
languages, cf. pp. 106-108 of my work, TJic Uldeat IJuuk of the 
Chinese, vol. i., 1892. In my lecture on the Early History of the 
Chinese Civilisation, 1880, p. 19-21, I gave a list of fifty words iden- 
tical in the two languages, but I was afraid of going on because of 
the pit-falls of monosyllabic comparisons, especially with a neo- 
monosyllabism like that of the Chinese. The two languages belong 
to the same original stock, but their grammar has diverged in course 
of time by external i'nflences of a different character. Cf. T. de L., 
Accadian and Swnerian in comparatice Philology: B. & 0. R., Nov., 
1886, The Law/uayes of China before the Chinese, 1887, §§ 8-IO, and 
20-26 ; and The Oldest Book of the Chinese, 1892, p. 106-108. Dr. 
J. Edkins published an Accadian and Chinese vocabulary in 1887, 
China Review, xv. 295-8 ; but the relationship of the two vocabu- 
laries has been established finally but by the Rev. C. J. Ball's The 
New Accadian, 1889-90, and Accadian Ajfinities, pp. 677-728, of 
Trans. Ninth Congress Orient, 1892-93. On the neo-monosyllabism 
of Chinese (a happy term of Mr. Ball, p. 712), cf. T. de L., Early 
llistory, 1881, p. 19; Jjeyinninys of Writing, 1885, j§ 49-55; The 
Languages, 1887, pp. 119, 137-9 ; Tibet, Philology, Encyclopaedia 
Britannica, 1888 ; Le Xon-Monosyllabisme dn Chinois Antique, 1889 ; 
and the concurring works of Prof. R. K. Douglas, China, 1882, 
p. 346. and various articles, Herbert Baynes, Die Jndo-Chinesische 
Philologic, Zeits. f. Volkerpsychol. 1888, xviii. p. 284, on my 
lectures at University College ; Alfred Maury, Journal des Sarants, 
Sept., Oct., 1889 ; Dr. R. de la Grasserie, Des llecherches Recentes 
de la Linguistique relatices au.v langues de V Extreme Orient, 1891 ; 
C. de Harlez, Existe-t-il des langues purenient monosyllabiqiies .' 1893. 

61) And also, stamping occasionally the bricks (cf. Perrot, Art 
Antique Chaldee, ii. 117, and F. Hirth, Anc Chin. Porcel,27); 
doors on sockets (cf. Perrot, ibid., 254, those of Telloh, and W. Gill, 
Golden Sand, i, 99) ; orienting buildings by the sun shade (Shi King, 
ibid.) ; washing the war weapons in prisoners' blood (Pinches, Guide 
Ximroud, p. 38 ; Tso-trhuen, V. xxxviii. 2, and X., vi. 6 ; Mencius, 
1 , 1, vii. 4) ; cutting the left ear of slain on battlefield (cf. Shi King, 
III., i., ode 3 ; Tso-tchuen, V., xxix. 14 and VI., ii. 1) ; &c. 

62) On works made to embank the rivers, vid. under Tchuen hiiih, 
the statements of the Tso-tchuen, Duke Tchao, year I., 1. Under 
Yao, vid. the Trhuh shu ki nien, Yao, years 19th, 61st, 7f)th. For 
further comparison with Chaldean works, cf. the interesting mono- 




CHINESE CIVILISATION. 



343 



graph, Les Travaux hydrauliqucs en Bahylonle, by P. A. J. Delattre, 
Bruxelles, 1188. There is no late Chinese invention in the art of 
sinking wells as at the time of Hwang-ti they knew it (cf. A'//* \ 
Uhung TcJiou shu). And under the reign of Shun, sinking wells 
was in the administration of Peh >/k, one of his nine ministers y 
(cf. She pen). The Chinese mode of sinking a well, as described in 
Hue, U Empire Chinois, 3, I., 316, is similar to that used in the 
ancient west, notably that in Egypt. Cf. Ch. Lenormant, AcadA "'•^^X 
(les Insrr., 12 Nov., 1852; Ed. Fournier, Le Vieu.}; Neuf, ii. 78. It 
is entirely different from the pot-wells and puika-welh (or brick 
wells) of India, on which cf. Ed. Balfour, Cijdopmlia of India, iii. 
1064. The well was looked upon in ancient China as the necessary \ 
centre and market place of every eight tribes or families, settled in ) 
as many square plots of land around it, as shown by the form of 
the written symbol tsiny (70 Bas.) used for it. On the ancient 
process of piercing, cf. Wang-tze nien, Shih y Ki : T. P. Y. L., 
189, 1 and 8. Also W. Gill, The Hirer of Golden Sand, i. 298-9. 
One of the secondary chieftains of the Bak Sings, at the time of 
their immigration was called Chief of the Potter's Wheel. Cf. — 
Shan Hai King, ii. 14 ; xvi. 3 ; xviii. 5 c. The oldest written 
symbol for it in Min Tsi Kih, Luh^hu tuny, ii. 21 <■., and other 
similar works looks like a lost-sight of pictograph. It is kiiln, 1563 
Bas. Cf. also Slian Hai King, xvi. 1-2. 

63) We must add also the ox as driving beast ; the horse and the 
ass as pack animals (cf. the two oldest symbols for //((/, horse, figuring 
one with long ears and no mane, the other with no ears and a long 
mane; also the sign lok, 12518 Bas., made of a horse and a bag) ; 
the sheep, the dog, and the fowl of Media. 

65) The importance attached to the observation of the stars, and the — 
building up of Tai-s, or towers, may be deduced from the celebrity 
of the observatory of King Wen, called the Marvellous Tower, 
Lin;/ Tai, Shi King, III., 1., VIII. It seems from Mencius' remarks 
on the subject (I. i., II. 3), that the entire population of the tribe 
had united in its construction. Cf. Edouard Biot, lierherches sur les 
micurs atwiennes des Chinois, d'apres le Chi-King, Journal Asiatique 
Nov., Dec, 1843; J Legge, Chinese Classics, vol. ii., p. 4; .vol. iv., 
pp. 162, introduction, and 456. On the Zigyiirats and the Chinese 
Tai, cf. A. H. Sayce, Relig. Babylon, 96 ; P. Jensen, Kosmologie, 
255 ; Paleologue, Art Chinois, 100-4. History reports the building 
of Tais at the beginning of the Hia dynasty. 

66) Dr. J. Edkins has an interesting note on Seals in China lieriew, \ 
1888, xvi. 372-4. The Babylonian use of personal seals existed ' 
also in Egypt, where cylinder seals often met with in early times 
disappeared almost entirely by the eighteenth dynasty. Cf . Flinders 
Petrie, Ten years digging in Egypt, 1892, p. 145. Babylonian seals 
have been found near the Pamir on the oldest trade route to China. 

67) Wells Williams, Syll. Diet., p. 454, says that the Lip-kuh were 
followers carrying screens over a general in his chariot, such as is 
seen in Assyrian sculptures. " In the warfare of the early times of 



> 



344 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

China chariots were much used. The ordinary war chariots for the 
troops contained only three men — an archer on the left, a soldier 
armed with Javelins and pike or spear on the right, and the 
charioteer in the centre. This continued down to the Tchou 
dynasty. The pictures of those chariots are not unlike those repro- 
duced on Assyrian monuments." Legge, Chin. Class, iii., p. 154, 
n. Les Egyptiens ne mettaient que deux hommes sur leurs chars, 
mais les peuples voisins en mettaient souvent trois. Cf. Congres 
Oriental St. Etienne, 457. We must notice also here the simple 
(tik) and the double {kwan) flute, the bell, two drums, a sort of reed 
organ, imported by the Bak Sings. Cf. Shu King, II., iv., 9 ; She 
pen; Shan Hai Kintj, xviii. 5 ; Ti Wang She Ki ; T. P., 580: 1, 5-6. 
The three-holed flute {goh) was introduced by the Tchou : cf . T. P., 
580, 6 : Shi King. The mu-nao, or sistrum, was introduced in the 
fifth century. Cf. Tchwang-tze ; Tchou-li, 29, 15; T. P., 39, 5.; 
cf. also G. von den Gheyn, Die Speeltingen te Babylon, pp. 81-90 : 
Dietsche Warande, 1888 ; F. Vigoureux, La Musique Babglonienne : 
0. C, iv. 475-493 ; A. Buckland, Primitice Instrumerits of Music, 
p. 249 sq. Anthropological Studies, 1891. Cf. also T. deL., On the 
ancient Bronze Drums of C/nna^ Indo- China^ and the Archipelago, 
April, 1894. 

\68) The emblematic figures on the robes of the first Chinese sove- 
reigns (on which see J. Edkins, China's Place, p. 14), remind us of 
the emblems figured on the Babylonian bas-reliefs of kings, on their 
dress and round their neck. 

69) And also Rafts of inflated skins (cf. P. Piassetsky, Voyage en 
Mongolieet en Chine, 392), as on the Assyro. -Babylonian monuments. 
The Tung Kwan Han Ki, of the second century A.D., speaks of 
coracles in use in the west as far south as Feng-tchu'an in Ta li fu, 
of W. Yunnan, T. P., 769, 1. The Sui shu says that the Kia-langy 
used to make coracles. The Shth tao tchi says the same thing of 
the inhabitants of Y'ueh-sin Kiiin. The first inhabited near Man 
tchou in the north-west of Szetchuen, on an affluent of the Yang-tze 
Kiang. The second on the borders of that great river in South 
Szetchuen. Cf. T. P., 166, 8; 788,6; 165,3; 769,1. W. W. 
Rockhill, in the eastern part of Tibet, has seen numerous skin 
coracles, on the Dre tch'u, or upper Yang-tze Kiang ; cf. The Land 
of the Lamas, 1891, pp. 197, 198, 199 (plate), 200 and 228 ; cf. our 
section 229. On round coracles among the Aleutian Islanders and 
in North Europe in the middle ages, cf. David McRitchie, The Finn 
Men of Britain, i. : The Archteological Review, 1889, iv., 13-14. 

369. Writing and Literature. There is nothing to modify in this 
section, as further facts have confirmed the statements therein. 

Additions and Emendations. 

72) A large amount of evidence of the derivation of the oldest 
Chinese characters from those of Babylonia and Elam in their 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 345 

transitory forms between the ages of Gudea and of Khammurabi ^ 
will be found also in the following works : T. de L., From Ancient 
Chaldea and Elatti to Earhj China, par. 14-32 : B. & 0. R., v., Feb., 

1891, where I have shown some survivals of the cuneiform shape / 
of characters in China; Cataloi/ue of Chinese Coins, 189^, intr. ' 
33-4 ; C. J. Ball, The New Accadian, 1889-90 ; Ideocjrams common to 
Accadian and Chinese, 1890-91 ; The Accadian affinities of the 
Chinese, 1893. 

76) The above note and text were published in the B. & 0. R., of 
March, 1889. In the China Eevietv, at the end of the following 
year, 1891, xix. 56-7, Dr. J. Edkins, in Cuneiform Writimj in 
China, said : " For myself, after some consideration, I have come 
to the conclusion that what early Chinese writers mean by tadpole 
is cuneiform writing." Cf. also the same scholar. The Ancient Tad- 
pole Writiwi was Cuneiform : ihid., xix. 255. Some more informa- 
tion on the preservation of the ancient Chinese texts and characters 
are given, pp. 102-5 of my book The Oldest Book of the Chinese, 

1892. Hii shen, when compiling the Shwoh Wan in A.D. 89, has 
preserved 441 Ku-wen characters that differed from his adopted rules 
of formation. The scholar who deserves the most under that respect 
was Lii-shen, of Jen in Shantung, whb flourished about 265 A.D., 
and published in his Tze-lin, or grove of characters, all the characters 
still visible on the lacquered tablets of antiquity yet preserved in 
the Royal Library of Loh Yang, and destroyed not long afterwards 
in the fourth Bibliothecal catastrophe, 311 A.D. (cf. Ma Tuan-lin, 
Wen hien tunr/ k'ao, kiv. 189 ; T. Watters, Essays on the Chinese 
Languarje, 1889, p. 40). The art of block-printing has been in- 
vented earlier than is commonly supposed. The Skuh tchi of the 
fifth century, a description of Szetchuen, gives the name of Hiang- 
liang, styled Kiii-to, who being eighty years old, first printed books, 
about 330 A.D., at Tcheng-tu, which was then the capital of the ■"" 
Non-Chinese State of Tcheng. Before 420 A.D. it was established 

at Nan-King, and before 558 at Loh-yang, where printing halls were 
organised with eighty hands in memory of the old age of the 
inventor (cf. Shiih tchi; Hon Tchou shn : T. P., 618, 4, 4 v.) In 
593 the first Imperial decree mentioning printing was issued ; it is 
this date which has been published by Stan. Julien in 1847. 

88) Prof. De Harlez has published since then Le Yih King, texte 
primitif, retabli. traduit et commente, 4to, 155 pp., Bruxelles, 
1889 ; Le Yi-King, sa nature et son interpretation : J. A., Jan., 
Feb., 1891, pp. 164-170; Le Yi-King au Tchun-tsiu et au Tso-tchuen: 
ibid., 1893, I, pp. 193 f. ; Review of Philastre's translation; 
T'omig-pao, March, 1894, pp. 93-98 ; The True Nature and Inter- 
pretation of the Yi-King : Asiastic Quarterly Review, April, 1894. 
The learned author has endeavoured to establish his theory as 
applying to the earliest period of the work ; but this theory is met 
at the outset by the facts, that he has made no preliminary criticism 
of the text, that this text is avowedly altered from what it was, and 
that the little that we know of these alterations are against his view 




346 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

for the primitive period of many chapters. It will be only when we 
are enabled to study the Kii-wen text of the Yh, that we shall see 
if the various meanings of each heading of the chapters had re- 
mained in most cases as simple lists, or if they had already been 
worked out into sentences. 

89) Cf. also the decisive confirmation of sections 146-148 of my 
work, The Oldest Book of the (Jhtnese and it^ authors, vol. i. 
History and Method, 1892. It has been most favourably reviewed, 
The London and China Telegraph, May, 1893, Manchester 
Guardian, March 24, 1894, &c. Several suggestions and interpre- 
tations, pp. xiii. and xv. of the introduction are only provisory, and 
will have to be tested by a study of the Ku-wen text, when available, 
before being finally accepted. 

9 1 ) The late date of some of the parts of the Shan Hal King may 
be appreciated by some internal evidence like the following : Kai 
Ming, the name of the kings of Shuh after 450 B.C. is mentioned 
xi., f. 3. The state of Ts'u is spoken of as Ta Tsu, xiii. 2, a 
tiy peculiarity of circa 350 to 250 B.C., when the two big states of Ts'in 
' ^ and Ts'u of the Chinese agglomeration were fighting for the Empire. 
It shows moreover that the author of chapter xiii., and probably 
of the chapters vi. to xiii., was belonging to the state of Ts\ti. We 
can surmise that parts of the survey made in that state in 548 B.C. 
(cf. § 211) has thus found its way into that part. As explained, p. 19 
supra, the Shan Hai Kingy^^'s, made of five different works, written 
in different times, containing in some cases some valuable geogra- 
phical knowledge of difficult elucidation. Prof. L. de Rosny has 
completed his translation in two vols., 1892. Prof. G. Schlegel, in 
his Prohlemes Geographigttes has shown in several instances the 
high value of the geographical information therein. Prof. Ch. de 
Harlez in the T''onng-pao of May, 1894, pp. 114-122, has written 
against the Shan Hai King a plea which calls for another plea in 
favour of this very valuable composite work. On the other hand 
there are reasons to believe that the Shni King which was incor- 
porated in the thirteenth book of the Shan Hai King by Kwoh-poh 
in the third century A.D., is the original work of Sang K'in who 
wrote it at the beginning of the Christian era. The separate , work 
under the same title and same author's name, which exists at present 
with a commentary by Li Tao-yuen of the fifth century, is said, 
according to A. Wylie's Notes on Chinese Literature, p. 43, to be 
the production of some unknown hand during the time of the Three 
Kingdoms, 220-277 A.D. It certainly exhibits a more accurate 
knowledge on some rivers of the south-west than the first work. 

370. Institutions and Religion (p. 19). The use of the divine prefix 
may have been an afterthought, and the identification proposed for the 
six Tsung is not confirmed as far as the names in question are con- 
cerned. On the other hand further confirmation has come forward of 
a quasi-monotheism in Anterior Asia. 



chinesr civilisation. 847 

Additions and Emendations. 

96) Like that of Hwang-ti in the legendary account reported, § 346, 
which we have understood as referring to the period of his reign 
preceding his migration eastward, since several only of the same 
appear later on distinctly in China, the first government described 
in the ^S////-^z;;;'^ comprehended ten chief officers or ministers: — 

(1) A Prime Minister, titled Pe/i-kiuet, or General Regulator ; 

(2) a Se-voh, litt., Four Mountains, a sort of adviser consulted by 
the sovereign ; (3) an Officer of Agriculture ; (4) of Instruction ; 
(5) of Crime; (6j of Works; (7) of Forests; (8; of Worship— of 
the spirits of heaven, of earth, and of men ; (0) of Music ; (10) of 
Advice (II., i. 2, 17-25). An interesting comparison could be 
made between the legendary administration of Hwang-ti and the 
latter which has all the historical character which the Shu King 
can impart. With the twelve pastors they made a total of twenty- 
two great officers of state. 

97) The appellative of M i d d d 1 e Kingdom appears in the 
Shu King, Yii Kung, I , ii. 15. On the Black Heads, cf. my mono- \ 
graph. The Black Heaiis of Babilotita and Ancient China : 15. & 
0. K., V. 233-246. The word Z?, 13125 Bas., in Zz-wz;/, which 
has been understood in that sense since remote times has had several 
acceptations, or at least perhaps it has come to represent three • 
different words or acceptations. At the first it appears {Shu-King, 
I., 2, II., 18 ; Kwoh-yu, Ts'u 2, &c., cf. supra note 1377) as that of 
agricultural populations on the left bank of the Hwang-ho, which 
opposed Shao^ao, were subdued by Tchuen-hiiih, and were reduced 

to starvation by the great overflow of the Yellow River under the ' 
reign of Yao ; secondly, the able, black-haired ones, as shown in 
the pre-cited monograph ; thirdly, many, numerous, the people at 
large, in later instances. 

loo) Add an important social status for the wife and for the mother* 
and probably some peculiarities in the right of ownership. On 
these points cf. amongst others G. Bertin, Akkadian Precepts for 
the conduct of man in his private life, 1884; V. et E. Revillout, 
Sur le droit de la Chaldee au XXII le et ati Ve siccles avant notre 
ere : pp. 273-530 of Les Obligations en Droit Egvptien, 1886 ; 
Bouinais et Paulus Le Culte des morts dans le (^eleste Empire, 
pp. iyi>-237; Chr. Gardner, (Jhine^e Laws and Customs, 188ii, 
&c. Miss Edith J. Simcox, in an important work on Primitive 
Civilisations, being first c/iapters in the history of owners flip, which 
will appear when the present pages are printed, has given a large 
share to China ; and she has kindly informed me that she has found 
only recognised in Chinese law the antichretic mortgage which the 
Revillouts have discovered in ancient Egypt and Chaldea. As the 
Chinese laws are reputed to have so little altered since remote times, 
that it is with reference to them that it has been said : " We survey 
a living past and converse with fossile men," it is not uninteresting 
to remark that one of the oldest Chinese inscriptions in existence, 
that of the San she p'an, is a deed of property which as far as I am 



348 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

aware has not yet been deciphered and translated. We must add 
also Notiojis of Eschiitohgv. Cf. on the dovible soul of the Assyro- 
Babylonians, J. Halevy, Ulmmortalite de VAme cJiez les !Se mites : 
Rev. Archeol, xliv., 1882, p. 44. Jeremias, Die Babylonisch-Assyri- 
chen VorsteUum/en vom Leben nach dem Tode, 1887. Among the 
Egyptians the ka and the hai or khu : G. Maspero, Histoire des Ames 
dans I'F^t III pte Ancieime : liev. Scientif. '.» Mars, 1879. Among the 
Chinese, the hivim, or spiritual soul, or Wi, breath the of shen, of 
spirit's nature ; and the p'eh, animal soul of the kwei, of ghost's 
nature; cf. Tso tchuen, X., vii. 4; Li Ki, xxi. 2, 1; ii. 2, 3, 13; 
Kia iju, xvii ; and C. de Harlez, Le Huan et le Pe, les deux Ksprits 
de I'/iom.me: Museon, 1893, Nov., 375-381. In later times the 
Platonician notion of the triplicity of the soul appears to have been 
imported into China, as it was adopted by the Neo-Taoists ; cf. also 
on the subject the interesting work Le Culte des Marts dans le 
Ci'h'ste Empire et V Annum compare au culte des Ancetres dans VAn- 
tiquite Occidentale, by Col. Bouinais et A. Paulus, 1893. 

102) Mr. Theo. G. Pinches, at the Victoria Institute, April 16, 1894, 
read an important paper on The Relvjious Ideas of the Bahi/lunians, 
in which he has shown that there existed among them a quasi 
monotheism, because most of the deities were usually identified with 
one supreme god. 

103) The statement that the names of the Six Ts'ungs referred 
to in the Skiot tieii of the Shu-King, have been preserved in the 
literature of the Han period, and were similar to those of the six 
minor gods of Susiana, was premature and must be cancelled. We 
do not decidedly know the names of the six Ts'ungs. They may or 
they may not have been the six minor gods in question, one cannot 
tell. They may have been the six predecessors of Shun, viz. : 
Hwang-ti, Shao-Hao, Tchwan-hiuh, Ti Kuh, Ti Tchih, and Yao, 
but there are some difficulties in these names because Ti Tchih 
had been only heir associate and Yao was still alive. Perhaps that 
some other names were on the list, to begin with that of Shen-nung. 
The Chinese themselves have never been able to agree on the matter, 
and curiously enough the commentators of the Han period have 
suggested astronomical or meteorological explanations which, as 
far as we know do not find the slightest support in collateral evidence. 
Cf. also Ancestral Worship in the Shu Kiwi, by M. H. Blodgel : 
J. Peking Orient. Soc, 1892, iii. 123-156. 



371. Historical Traditions and Legends, (p. 21). The ten A7, the thir- 
teen heavenly and eleven terrestial kings with their mythical chronology 
have decidedly no right to be enumerated there as they belong to the 
introductions of the fifth century ; they appeared late in literature, 
3^^t'3<)and always with the nine human kings, making thirty-three fabulous 
beings spoken of in section 193. The legendary fishmen, carriers of 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 349 

writing, and the calendar tree, on reconsideration, appear also to 
belong to the same later date. 

AddItions and Emendations. 

120) Mr. Robert Brown, Jun., in a later article on Tlie Ten Patriarchs 
of llerosm (The Academy, June 15, 1893, p. 56), has given reasons 
which make the names of " the ten kings appear to be impersona- 
tions of natural phenomena, afterwards adapted to an astronomical 
cycle." 

126) Cf. Note 719 and add. In a special paper on The Flood Legend 
and its remains in Ancient China (B. & 0. R., Iv., 15-24, 4'.*-3B,~7^- 
88, 102-111), I have pointed out several traces in Chinese literature 
of the western story of the deluge, and I have shown that the well 
known legend of Niikwa, known in fragments of the Shang litera- 
ture, is based upon some incidents, as in the Story of the Flood, 
in the Nemrod Epos of the Chaldean poet. A peculiarity of the 
Chinese account that Niikwa repaired the rent of heaven with stones 
of five colours has been found also in the Chaldean account, where 
the "great goddess raises an arch of precious stones," or raises up 
the great intaglios made by Anu. Cf: also T. de L., On the Ancient 
History of Glass and Coal and, the Lrf/end of Nii-kwa's coloured stones 
in China (T'oung Pao, 1891) ; and The Oldest Book of the Chinese, 
i., 1892, xvi. 113-114, on the same legend in the Yh. Kin;!, and our 
note 71'*. For the demonstration about the Chaldean ^account, cf. 
P. Jensen, Die Kosniolot/ie der Bahnlonier, pp. 380, 881 and 4oi'-440. 
A peculiarity which I take to show that the legend was an adaptation 
by the Bak Sing_s. themselves is the connection established therein 
with the Pu-tchou-shan, Badsakshan or Badakshan, a country 
through which their traders in jade used to travel. 

127) Cf. also W. St. Chad Boscawen, The Elamite Orujin of Chines'" 
Civilisation: B. & 0. R , Sept., 1893, p. 17, and Jjeginnin;/s of 
Chaldean Cirilisation : B. & 0. R., Oct., 1893, pp. 29-30. 

131) Cf. also T. de L., The Calendar Plant of China, The Cosmic 
Tree, and tlie Date Palm of Babylonia, 22 pp., 1890, and Chaldean 
and Eyyptian Trees on Chinese Sculptures of 147 AD. : 1883, B. it 
0. R., vi., 283-7, and erratum vii. 96. The " Fabulous Fishmen " 
and the " Tree of Life as a Calendar Tree," were most probably 
introduced only in 500 B.C. by the traders of the Erythroean Sea in 
Shantung. 



372. In the fifth chapter (p. 25) the entry concerning the six fs''icn^e, as 
pointed out out already, must remain an open question. Further 
evidence of the Elamite character of a large part of the civilisation 
imported by the Hwang-ti-ites has appeared in chapter X. sections 
343-348. Mr. W. St. Chad Boscawen in favour of the same view has 
written The Elamite Origin of Chinese Civilisation, Sept., 1893. 



/" 



350 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

373 Additions and Emendations of Chapter VI. pp. 29-83. 

150) The Bamboo Annals register the first arrival of tribes reckoned 
among the ancestors of the Tchou as follows : — " The Jung, 

y barbarians of A7- Tchimg, came to make their submission in the 
' sixth year of Kwei of Hia." The country of the Ki-Tchnng, 2284 
or 10639-10728 Bas., is spoken of in the Shan Hat King, iv. 6, and 
viii. 3, as situated beyond the shifting sands in the north. They 
introduced with them hemp in south-west Kansuh. Cf. my paper 
On Hemp from Central Asm to Ancient China, 1700 B.C. : B. & 

0. R , vi. 247-253, and vii. 96. 

151) The people of Kwarism, Khorasmia, east of the Caspian, dated 
from the beginning of their colonisation of their country, 980 years 
before Alexander. They distributed the twenty-eight lunar man- 
sions over the twelve signs of the zodiac, for which they also had 
special names in their language. Cf. Al Biruni, The Chronologv 
of Ancient Nations, tr Sachau, pp. 40, 22G. On the importance of 
the Khorasmian dominion and civilisation of that remote time, cf. 
the suggestive remarks of Sir Henry Rawlinson, Central Asia : 
Quarterly Review, Oct., 1866 : England and Russia in the East : 
1875, p. 461-502 ; and Comments on some recent Peh hi decipher- 
ments, by Ed. Thomas, 1872, p. 18 ; Did Cvrus introduce writing 
into India f by T. de L. : B. k 0. R., Feb., 1887, p. 61 ; cf. also 
Hccatceus, frag. 173 ; Herodotus, iii. 93; Arrian, iv. 15, 4. 

153) The oldest references to the notions of xn and^f?;/,^, the two 

^ principles of nature, obscurity and light, female and male, &c., 

appeared also with the Tchou people. For instance Shu King. V. iv. 

1, and XX. 5; Shi King, III. ii. Ode 6; 17; King, appendice 
Twan, k. 11, attributed to Wen Wang, but not in the text of the 
book. It cannot be denied that views and ideas which afterwards 

^ have been preserved in the Zend-Avesta were current in the west 
of Anterior Asia at very ancient da|es. Some of them were already 
current when the Bak Sings^left the Bakthyari hills ; others have 
come to China through the Tchou (Aryanised Kirghizes) and their 
relations with the west. Further investigations in that field of 
research would certainly be rewarded by fresh disclosures of the 
same kind. For instance the Pat, female demon of drought, spoken 
of in the ode yun-han of the Shi King, TTl. iii. 4. 6, at the occa- 
sion of the drought of 802 B.C., is found also in the combination 
of legends heaped under the name of Hwang-ti in the introductory 
note of the Tchuh shu ki nien, older than 296 B.C., and in the last 
book of the Shan Hai King, xvii. 4 (added before A.D. 57 by Liu- 
hin from older documents; ci. supra note 91). The latter docu- 
ments make Hwang4i seek the help of this Tien^Niii, or Celestial 
woman called Pat, against Tchi-7'u who li^-d hidden himself behind 
mists and rains to escape attack. Now this is clearly an allusion 
to the struggle of Apaosha (cf. Pat) the demon of drought, against 
Tishtrya (cf. Tchi-v«), the producer of rain, in the Avesta ; cf. J. 
Darmesteter, Le Zend-avcsta, vol. ii., p. 241-422, on these two 
mythical beings. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 



351 



157) Boulders of a beautiful dark green nephrite have been found in 
the valleys of the Batougol Mountains, west of Irkutsk, by Mr. 
Alibert. Jadeeite is now found at Shunning and Yun-fu of 
Western Yunnan, and at Teng-yueh, further south on the frontier. 

159) Cf. also On the source of the Jade used for ancient implements 
in Europe and America, by F. W. Rudler, of the Anthropological 
Institute, 1891, a short and clear resume, with useful references, 
and L. Couradt, Die Nephritgrubcn von Schacliidula nnd die 
sell lei fereien von Chntan .■ Z. f. Ethnolog., 1893, xxiii. (J92. Dr. 
Arzuni, Ncphritvon Schacliidula^ ibid.^ xxiv., lO-l-^B. A. Martens, 
Undersuchnng des nephrits von Schachidula^ ibid. xxiv. H. 
Haberlandt, Ueber nephrit nnd Jadit Gegenstaende aus Central 
Asien, Wien, 1891. On a mine of jadeite at Roquedas, on the 
sea shore of Morbihan, cf. E. Cartailhac, La France Prchistoriquc, 
188^, p. 267. Also Kristian Bahnson, On objects of nephrite and 
Jade in Europe^ 188^) : Mem. Soc. Antiq. du Nord. The most 
important work on the subject is the Neue Beitrage zur Kenntniss 
des Nephrit and Jadcif Berlin, 1891, by Dr. A. B. Meyer of 
Dresden, and his former paper Die Nephitfrage kein ethnologisches 
Problem, Berlin, 1883. 

i6t) Cf. R. Virchow, Eine Saimnlnng'Assvrischcr Steineartefarkte, 
namentlich soldier ans Nephrit : z. f. Ethol. 1887, xix, 456-61, 724. 
Nephrit' Ring from Erbil : ibid., 1892, xxiii. 81. 

162) The jade question has made great progress since the last few 
years. Dr. Arzuni, of Berlin, and other scholars have shown that 
the microscopic structure of nephrite and jadeite diflers accord- 
ing to localities. The nephrite implements of Switzerland have 
thus been proved not to be Asiatic, while on the contrary the 
nephrite implements of Assyrio-Babylonia belong to the Turkestan ■ 
mines. Therefore most part of the speculative views quoted m the 
first part of this note is now baseless, as the polytropic origin of the 
jades has become evident. An exception however is made for the 
whj^ jadeeite, which had been found in Turkestan, and of which 
implements have been discovered in the oldest ruins of Hissarlik. 
Cf. Schliemamis Excavations, by C. Schuchhardt, London, 1891, 
p. 38. 

164) The Shan Hai King, vii. 2, speaks mythologically of the N'ii 
Tsi and of the N'n Ts'ih (A'm= woman) states in the north-east of 
Tibet. On the two kingdoms ruled by queens in the north-west and 
east of Tibet; cf. the Peh she and the T' ang shn s notices translated 
in S. W. Bushell, The Earlv History of Tibet, n. 42 : J. R. S. A., 
xii., Oct., 1880, and Woodville Rockhill, The Land of Lamas, pp. 
339-41, from the Sui shii, kiv. 83, and from the T'ang shn, 
kiv. 122. 

171) Abdallah Beidavi, who died in 1292, cannot have been the 
author of the Tarikh-i-Khata, or History of China, which is dated 
1317. The work was in reality written by Bcnaketi. Cf. E. 
Quatremere, Histoirc des Mongols, pref. 4, 85, 99 ; E. Bretschneider, 
MedicEval Researches, i. ]96, n. 532. Although mentioned by 



_^E LIB/ 

'^^"^ OF THI 

UNIVEi 



352 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

Firdusi, b. A.D. 940, in his famous poem, the Shah nameh^ the 
marriage of a Chinese Imperial Princess by Djemshid is not spoken 
of in Mirkhond's History of the early kings of Persia^ fifteenth 
century, cf. trsl. David Shea, p. 99-122. 

172) Subsequent researches have convinced me that the Ring Money 
had come earher to the cognisance of the Tchou, who inckided them 
in their financial enactments of 1091 B.C. Cf. my Chinese Coins. 
early period, p. x. They had learned it with the other notions of 
civilisation from Baktria and Khorasmia, which had come to them. 
The system had been introduced in Anterior Asia by the Egyptian 
conquest of the eighteenth dynasty. 

177) The book called Kwan-tze, name of the able minister of Ts'i, 
who lived in the seventh century, contains a great deal about his 
deeds and sayings but was compiled much later, perhaps about 
400 B.C. (cf. B. & 0. R., May, 1893, p. 264). It contains also 
much later matter, such as sayings of Tze-hia, who died about 406 
B.C. (cf. T. P., 928, 6). It ought not to be used without caution 
as evidence of the seventh century. The late Prof. Georg. von der 
Gabelentz has given L'CEnvre du philosophe Knan-tsi ; specimen 
du texte, traduction et notes : Lc Lotus, v. 81-103. 

184) To the names given in the text must be added those of Kania- 
lanka {i.e., Pegu or old Hansawadi, and the delta of the Irawadi) ; 
also Langkawi near Kedah, Ling-ga island, south of the Malacca 
Peninsula, Ling-ka-poli-pah-to island, opposite the Lin-yh or North 
Cochinchina ; cf. S. Beal : Buddhist Records of the Western 
World, 1884, vol. ii , p. 200. W. P. Groeneveldt : Notes on the 
Malav Archipelago and Malacca, compiled from Chinese sources, 
Batavia, 1870, pp. 79, 10. Prof. Leon de Rosny, Les Peuplcs 
Orientaux connus des Anciens Chinois^ 1881, p. 64, edit. ii. 1886, 
pp. 208, 252, places Lang-ya-siu at the south point of Cochinchina. 
Those various stations were not contemporary, and some of these 
names have been transformed by local folk etymology. 

185) She Hwang-ti built there the Lang-ya t'ai, an edifice of several 
stories. It was in the modern district of Tchu tch'ong, on the 
south of the Shantung peninsula ; cf. W. F. Mayers, Chinese R.M., 
i. 335 ; cf. our section 225. 

189) It is not exact at present to state with the authorities quoted 
here that the Chinese had no knowledge of the Sunda Islands before 
the sixth century. As shown in several parts of the present work, 
sailors' yarns about these islands were heard of 400 B.C. ; they 
became less fabulous about our era ; but in the third century some 
extensive and accurate notions were obtained and published, notably 
by K'ang-tai and Tchu yng. Unhappily fragments only remain of 
their works. 

190) The country of iS/zo//-//;/ is mentioned in the Shan Hai King, 
xvi. 5, among the unknown countries outside the border lands at 
the time. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 868 

195) This was in the third year of Tchou Tcheng Wang, 1101 B.C. 
The Nere in question is written Ai-Ii\ 4026-11932 13as., while the 
Nala of Asoka is written 4926-5073 13as. Cf. S/iiIi y ki, kiv. 2, 
fol. 6 ; Li'h tai ki sze nien piao, kiv. 6, fol. H ; Stan. Julien, Simple 
Expose, 1842, p. 204-9. Stan. .Julien, like myself, judging from the 
mountainous lands travelled through by the envoys of Nele had looked 
for their native country beyond the south-west borders of China. It 
is there that the roads over high ridges are often in the clouds and 
fogs, that rivers run through caves, and that the traveller passing 
under downfalls of water hears their noise over him, as described by 
modern travellers (Giles, Colquhoun, Baber, &c.), and in the account 
of their journey by the envoys from Nele, Dr. G. Schlegel has 
kindly communicated to me (6 May, 1894) a first proof of his 
Probleincs Gcoi^rap/iiqncs XIII. Ni-li-kuo from which it appears 
that the Sln'h-v-ki in the fifth kiv. mentions a mission of a Nele 
country in 193 B.C. from beyond Fiisang (= Sakhalin). Dr. S. 
identifies it with the country of the Tchuktchis, and his indentifi- 
cation appears probable. But the name of this Nele is written like 
that of into B.C.. and the Chinese compilers, for that reason, have 
concluded that the first mission had come from the same country 
as the second. The evidence appears not to be sufficient under that 
respect, as the Ku shtii crossed by the old mission was a name of 
the Lang-tsan Kiang. 

196) In the fifth year of the King Hien, the thirty-second ruler of the 
Tchou dynasty, i.e., 364 B.C., it rained /z7/ stones in Tch'ing, which 
place corresponds to the district of Kiang-ling, department of King- 
tchou, in the south of the province of Hupeh. Cf. Tchnh shii. ki 
nien, Tchen Hien XXXII, 5. It seems to be a poetical reference 
to an arrival of jade stones brought in by some trading parties. 

196) It is said that the discovery of green jade in Burma was acci- 
dentally made by a Yunnanese trader in the 18th century ; cf. Proc. 
of Chief Conim., Burma, Aug., 1888, Rangoon, and Dr. Noetling's 
Report on Jade in Upper Burma, 1892. On the amber trade, cf. 
note 9H8. 

216) When I wrote that Shao-Hao had remained in the west, I ought 
to have added that it was only for a time. The fact is that Shao- 
Hao governed the west, c. 2282-2250 B.C., until he removed to the 
east, and established a colony on the south-west of Shantung, in 
the interest of his father, Hwang-ti, until his death, circa 2213. 
But being far from the centre of the Bak families (Kung tchang fu 
of south-west Kansuh), he did not succeed to his father (2232) and 
Tchuen Hiiih in 2225 was elected sovereign there. 

As to the statement that Pong, or Phcenix, tribes brought books 
to Shao-Hao, I have not been able to find a tithe of probability in 
favour of such a construction put erroneously upon a statement 
which bears another complexion. The story of the Tso tchuen is a 
systematized account under one system of explanation of various 
facts which differed originally. A legendary account wanted 
phoenixes, as birds of good omen, to have appeared during Shao- 



354 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

Hao's government, and to have suggested to him to distinguish 
henceforth his various officers by feathers of birds (to their caps !) 
arranged according to their duties and the seasons which concerned 
them. The full account of the jDre-cited chronicle does not leave 
any doubt on the subject. But the ambiguous terms of one or two 
sentences when separated from the context (a most dangerous 
process in Chinese) have been the cause of the misconception, 
thus : " there appeared phoenixes and he recorded by birds," hence 
the legend of phoenixes or Pongs bringing in some records or books. 
As a fact the Bak Sings had heard of this custom before their 
migration from Anterior Asia, where it was practised to a certain 
extent. Cf. for instance the Assyro. -Babylonian /"zy/rt/w, a swallow, 
prefect, governor (Brunn. List, 2099), and other cases. 

249) On the Dahae, who are said to be an Elamite tribe (cf. Sayce, 
on Herodotus, I.e.) See also Fr. Lenormant, Lettrcs Assyriologiqtics, 
i. 61 ; F. Vigoureux, La Bible, iv. 260. 

270) The suggested restoration of 7i'« into Tscrit, and therefore as 
a possible antecedent of the name oi Scr in'TEe west, rests on the 
reading of the character as a phonetic compound made Ts////, cl 157, 

' and Lrt/;z=Rrt/;z, mod. Iiii, 4136, Bas , over it for the final. But 
the name Seres is better explained as 1 have done in, note 985. 

275) The conquest of SJmh by the Ts'inites took place according to 
the She Ki, Tchang-y-tchuen, kiv. 70, fol. 4 v., in the ninth year 
of Ts'iN Hwui wang, i.e., 329 B.C., or according to the same work, 
Liih kwoh nien piao, in the twenty-second year of the same king, 
i.e., 316 B.C. It suggests two successive attacks. 

281) Kang-tai is the officer of the Wu-kingdom, who was sent in a 
mission to Funam (=Phnom— Cambodja), after 226 A.D. to report 
upon the southern countries. Peh-lu is written 138-3027 Bas., in 
the Shan Hai King, and 1)53-3690 Bas., in his work. It might 
perhaps be identified with Perak. As India used to be provided with 
tin from the west as stated in the Periplus, and not the reverse, it 
is interesting to note this earliest date known of the trade of Malayan 
tin. 

310) Let us remark the confirmation given by that name, and that 
of Tsin in the Burmese chronicles (note'2iiO and text) to our reading 
of the ancient name of the Tsu-ite kingdom of Tsen in Yunnan. 

331) Further investigations have shown me that while the general 
results of Richtofen's and Yule's work on the subject are correct, 
their identification of Kattigava with Hanoi was premature. Cf. 
note 1036. 

335) The date 1777 B.C. for the first approach of the Chinese to the 
sea is that of the Bamboo Books. 180 i is that of the rectified 
chronology. 

336) The black stone object representing a wig and hair and hair- » 
dress is in black steatite, and it bears a dedication by Dungi to a)' 
deity, whose name Mr. T. G. Pinches tells me is partly obliterated | 
and cannot be deciphered. My lamented friend Consul E. Colborne 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. SS-"^ 

Baber called my attention on the explanation afforded by pi. 215 
in Perrot-Chipiez, O.C II, p. 481, to the Chinese town gates, and 
he had promised to contribute an article on the subject in the 
B. k 0. R., but his departure for Burmah-China prevented the 
fulfilment of his promise. 

337) At Khotan the native population was most probably that of the 
Issedons whose name was subsequently altered into the Sanskrit 
KustauiX to fit a local myth. We hear of them in the poetry of 
Alkman of Sparte, 671-631 B C, fragm. 94, in Aristeas, of Prokon- 
nesus, GOO B.C., IV., 3, in Hecatseus of Miletus, fragm. 160, and in 
subsequent classical writers, but in a very vague manner. Cfr. E. 
H. Bunbury, History of ancient Gcop-aphv^ vol. i. pp. 102, 141, 
mo, ii. 598, and McCrindle, Ancient India of Ptolemy, p. 295. On 
the extension of the Chaldeo-Elamite civilisation towards the east, 
cf. i'nneiforui Inscriptions near the Pamir : B. & 0. R., vi. 168. 

340) We are afraid to have unduly minimised here the probability 
of some foreign missions, probably caravans from the west arrived 
during the reign of Sh.\ng Tai Mou. Further justice is meted to 
them in section 392 below. The dates pp. 75-76 are those of the 
Bamboo Annals. 

242) On Wu-hien as a foreigner, cf. section 301) and notes 965, 1238, 
and add. 1238. 

344) The Bamboo Annals record that in the sixth year of K'i of 
Hia (c. 1941 B.C.), Peji-jh, who had been Chief Forester under 
Shun, and had helped the great Yii in his works {Shu King, II. i. 
22, and ii. 4, 6, 21), died, and that a sacrifice was appointed to ^ 
him. 

34;) On the tabued words, cf. Hilderic Friend, Euphemism and Tabu 
]'n China: Folklore Record, 1881, iv., 71-01. R. K. Douglas, 
On Tahu-cd Characters : Chinese Manual, 1889, 372-6. F. Garnier, 
Voyage d^ Exploration en Ohine, ii. 171. Liu-hie; Sin Inn, kiv. 6, 
f. 31 of 500-550 A.D. T. P. Y. L., 562, 8-9. T. de L., Catalogue 
of Chinese Qoins, xxxvi. 

346) Tchon, name of the famous dynasty, is written by the Tibetans . 
Tchigur, according to Sarat Chandra Das, Sacred Litcratnre~''&c., ' 
of Ancient China, translation of Dub-thah Selkyi Melon. Dr. J. 
Edkins has suggested that it was TOK in olden times, in his Intro- 
duction to the study of Chinese Characters, p. 87 ; while Mr. 
Kingsmill has preferred Djrnv in his paper on Myths. The Archaic 
dialects do not help because they are too late (tchou, tcheii), and a , 
comparison of the Dp its, hord, of the Kirghises-kaisaks would not 
be justified. The old worcTdid contain a final k or ku, as shown by 
the preservation of a guttural final in phonetic derivates, as Dr. 
Edkins has pointed out. On the other hand the composition of the 
character ought to be decisive in the matter. It is made of Dsong 
(mod. yung, use), and of ku (mod. kou, mouth), suggesting djo-ku / 
for the ancient sound of the name. We might compare it to 
DJAGAtai or the like. The explanation of Ki/ik by Kirk, Kirkhizes, 



356 OEIGIN OF THE EARLY 

is perhaps not quite safe, because it may be as well explained by 
Kilting, lucky, happy, a title among the Turks-Tartares. Cf. also 
La Nationaiitc dii pciiple de Tchcou, by C. de Harlez : J. A., 18'J2, 
XX. 335 f. 

347) In the time of Muh Wang, the Jungs and the Tehs having 
ceased to pay tribute, tlie monarch invaded the K''ucnjung in the 
west and captured five of their Tripgs ; obtaining also four white 
deer and four white wolves. The monarch then removed Yung to 
T'ai yuen (at present the capital of the Shensi provinces). Hon 
Han Shu, kiv. 117, tr. Wylie. 

356) According to Mr. Thomas Ferguson, Chinese chronology and 
cyr/rs, p. 220, the origin of the Duodenary cycle (of animals) may 
be traced to a systematic connection with the twenty-eight siilh, and 
its Chinese historical origin can thus be only synchronical vnth the 
appearance in China of the twenty-eight si'llh. Prof. G. Schlegel, 
Wr anagraph I e Ghinoise, p. !»03. has collected evidence showing 
that it was known during the Tchou dynasty ; the earliest instance 
cited is said to belong to the reign of Tchou Siian Wang {Shz King^ 
II. iii. 6). 

357) On the Nakshatras. They seem to have been mapped out on 
the heavens as groups of stars, not far from the ecliptic, readily 
recognizable, and by the position of the moon and planets could be 
readily indicated (James Burgess, J.R.A.S., Oct., 18i:i3, p. 753). Alb. 
Weber, Hist. Ind. Lit., p. 30, says that they are enumerated singly 
in the Taittirva-Samhita, and the order in which they occur is one 
which must necessarily have been established somewhere between 
1472 and 536 B.C. Cf. supra note 1222 for a probability of the 
twelfth century. 

They do not appear in Babylonia earlier than on astronomical 
tablets of the Greek period, namely on calendaric tablets of 122 and 
100 B.C. Cf. their names in P. J. Epping, Astronomisches aiis 
Babylon, pp. 117-133 : Ergjinzungshefte zu den " Stimmen aus 
Maria-Laach." 44 ; Freiburg, 188y. Dr. P. Jensen, Die Kosino- 
logie dcs Babylonicr, Strassburg, 1890, has nothing important on 
the subject. The Babylonian names in twenty-one cases out of 
twenty-eight are purely descriptive ; for instance : II, mahru sha 
rishu ku, i.e., W e s t-o f-t h e-h e a d-o f-k u, or /? Aries ; III, Arku 
sha rishu kn, i.e., E a s t-o f-t h e-h e a d-o f-k u, or Aries ; XXI, 
Miiru sha shiitii, i.e., So ut h-of-Nuru, or a Libra; &c., and these 
descriptions show that the knowledge of these twenty-eight lunar 
mansions were a foreign importation, which the Babylonians grafted 
on their own previous knowledge of ecliptical constellations. 
Prof. W. Whitney, in his studies on the Nakshatras published in the 
Journ. Am. Orient. Soc. in 1866, has come to the conclusion that, 
considering the concordances existing among the three systems " 
of the Hindoos, Chinese, and Arabians, it can enter into the mind 
of no man to doubt that all have a common origin, and are but 
different forms of one and the same system." These concordances 
coupled with the foreign character and late appearance of the lunar 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 357 

mansions in Babylonia and the ancient existence of such a system 
with the old Khorasmian astronomers, points to the latter's country 
as the focus from where it spread to China and through the channel 
of the Persian dominion, to India, Babylonia, and Arabia afterwards. 
Comparative lists of the lunar mansions are given in various works. 
The most recent are : James Burgess, Xoh^s on Hindu Astronomy : 
J. R. A. S., 1890, p, 756 ; J. Norman Lockyer, Eai-lv Astcrisms, 
iii., Nature, 28 Dec, 1893 ; T. W. Kingsmill, A comparative table 
of the ancient Ivnar Asterisms : J, Ch. Br. R. A. S., 1891-2, 
xxvi. p. 44-79. 

363) We may mention also as evidence of relations with the west of 
the Pamir range the following circumstances : Under the reign of 
Tcheng-wang, according to the Tchou sJm, if not already under 
Wen Wang, according to the S/nvoh wan, the K'nan Yung, also 
called K' nan-faiij, of the west presented a beautiful horse, the body 
white, mane red, and eyes like gold, named Kih-liang or Kih Kwanij 
(ci. Tchou shii : Shwoh wan ; Shan hai Kiwi, xii, 1 v.). It became 
the fashion at court in China to dye the manes and tails of horses 
red. Cf. Shu Kin;/, V. xxiii. 1, edit. Legge, p. 562 ; Tso tchucn, XI, 
Ting Kung, x. 12, edit. Legge, p. 778, The practice was a direct 
importation from Khorasan and Persia. 'Cf. also Edw. Balfour, Qycl. 
of India, p. 37. 



374. Chapter Til. Part I. and II. pp. 85-129. 

369) First prison in China. About 1803 B.C., the eighth ruler of 
Hia dynasty is reported in the annals of the Bamboo Books to have 
made a circular enclosure for a prison. The words in italics are 
additions of the commentators, as the original text says only that he 
tso kwan t'u, made a circular enclosed ground. The matter by itself 
would have little significance, were it not the fact that prisons are 
or were unknown to the Altaic races, and Vambery testifies that 
amongst the Turkomans the prisoners who are not put to death or 
do not become slaves are attached simply by a chain to the ground, 
Mr. F. Geo. Mohl, in a recent review of some works of the late 
Prof. August Ahlgvist, of Helsingfors, has remarked that in Vogul 
and Ostiak the terms for ' jail ' are simply translations of a Russian 
appellative (Mem, Sac. Ling., 1892, vii. 431). The notion of making 
a prison was therefore another foreign importation into the Flowery 
Land. The remote date of the event is interesting to note. 

572) On imbrication of bronze and iron welded together, and of 
damaskeening in Assyria, cf. Dr. Percy's note in Layard's 
Discoveries, p. 670 ; Perrot-Chipiez, Hist. Art Ant., ii. 721-2 ; in 
Egypt, cf. A. H. Sayce, Herodotus, p. 257 ; Wilkinson, Ancient 
Egyptians, ed. Birch, ii. 257-8; Perrot-Chipiez, O.C., i. 839; at 
Hissarlik and Mikenffi, cf. Schliemann's Excavations, by Dr. C. 
Schuchhardt, pp. 230, 264, 297, &c. 

384) It is exact to say that the state of Yueh does not appear in the 



358 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

Tchuntsiu before 537, but the Tso-tckmn mentions it first in 601. 
Therefore it may have been inchided in 584 with that of Wu in the 
astronomical distribution. 

391) Herewith the comparative List of names (of the months) in 
Babylonian, and (of a cycle of twelve) in Chinese : Bab. Nisan-== 
Nuy-han ; Bab. Propitious bull=generous cattle. Bab. Sivannu.= 
Tihfannoh in ancient and tchihfanjoh, in modern Chinese. Bab. 
Tamuz= TaMz-oi, tan-oh. Bab. AB=Hejjhap, hieh-hiah. Bab. 
liitsisviivsn = Kentuk, yen-mou. Bab. DvL.Ku — Tsai/ah, tsoh-oh. 
Bab. A.nAK-SHAUMAu=Loktoman(/, Ta-mang-Loh Bab. Gangannna 
IIHwian, ta-yuen-hien. Bab. TKBir^Tibtu, tchihsiu. Bab. Shebat 
=^Shepti-koh, sheh-t'i-koh. Bab. Sekixtar=7V< hran tun, kwan-tun. 
The Chinese list was dislocated, and its order different. It looks 
like a corrupted transcription. 

The Babylonian names and colours of the planets which appear 
to have been imported into China with the names of the months, 
itc, by the west traders with Shantung, have also been preserved in 
asti^logical works in a curious state of dislocation : 
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 



392) The names of the 10th, 11th, and 12th of the Chinese list of 
the 12 ts'e are fuller than given here and read respectively shun shou, 
shun ho, shun wi, i.e., head, fire, tail of the bird quail, or eagle 
(Eitel), corresponding to the celestial quadrant of the Red Bird, or 
Trhii-nio, the Summer One. There are no other names concurring 
with the three other quadrants, viz., Tsantj Lumj, or Azure Dragon 
for spring, Hiuen Wu, or Black Warrior for winter, and Peh hu, or 
White Tiger for autumn, corresponding to east, north, and west. 
The four animals of the quadrants therefore were only partly known 
at that time. It is what we should expect from their western 
origin. In the time of Nebukadnezzar, as far as they are described, 
in the vision of Ezekiel, their inception Avas probably achieved 
although each of the four beings therein shared the particularities 
of a man, lion, eagle, and cherub. This astronomical character is 
shown by the eyes (i.e., stars?) that covered their bodies (i. IS, 
X. 12) by their wheels (revolutions), and by the " likeness of a 
firmament" abbve them (i. 22). In the Apocali/pse they appear dis- 
tinctly. I do not know of -any evidence showing that the Chinese 
had become acquainted with these four denominations before the 
Han period. They were not known by the compilers of the Er-ya, 
nor by Kii-yuen (end of the 4th cent. B.C.) who in his Li Sao, where 
he had plenty of occasions to mention them, speaks only of the Hien 



Bab. 


Kaivanu 


Saturn 


Black 


Chin. 


Hih kwan ki 


Mercur 


>> 


Bab. 


Pitsn 


Venus 


White 


Chin. 


Pih tchao kin 


J) 


)) 


Bab. 


Sucunu 


Jupiter 


Brown red 


Chin. 


She tchu niu 


Saturn 


Yellow * 


Bab. 


Dawinu 


Mercure 


Blue 


Chin. 


fjini/weinjani/ 


Jupiter 


Green 


Bab. 


Xibatanu 


Mars 


Red 


Chin. 


Tsilipiaonn 


M 


)) 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 359 

tchi, which name occurs in the Tim hran shn book of the She Ki 
as that of the quadrant afterwards called the I'di-lin, White Tiger. 
Lii Pu-wei, who died iu 237 B.C., did not know them, and the Li 
ki, is also silent. Szema Tsien in the precited Tien kwan sku 
appears to have been the first who mentions them with the 
exception referred to. And they appear all four in the Wen i/ao 
kou of the first century B.C. The commentators of the She 
ki have not been able to quote any older authority. No 
historical inference can be drawn from the fact that the first of the 
Chinese lists corresponds to the fourth of the Babylonian, since they 
were used only for astrological purposes and fixed in China accord- 
ing to prejudices foreign to any scientific object, and only in the 
seventh century B.C. Tso-kiu-ming, of the fifth century, in his 
own remarks {Tso tchuen, I. v. 7), speaks of the Ltm[/ Men — appear- 
ance of the dragon — season, with other names for the three other 
seasons, so that the case suggests only a partial knowledge. 

396) Similar sacrifices were made . in Szetchuen. When Tchao 
Wang of Ts'in (after 305 B.C.) invaded the Shuh country, and that 
Li-ping was prefect there, it had been customary to give every year 
to the Spirit of the River, two young girls for wives. Cf. Tom/ aiih 
tun<i: T. P., 882, 4. 

The practice extended northwards along the sea coasts. 
An annual ofiering of a maiden to the sea existed about 200 
B.C. amongst some populations north-east of Corea. Cf. D., Hervey 
St. Denys, Ethnot/raphie de ^iatouanlin, i. 327. J. Klaproth; Aperqu 
General des Trois Royaumes, 149. Cf. also : Some vestiijes of Girt 
Sacrifices: J. Anthrop, Inst., May, 1882. 

414) The woodwork of Chosroes Palace in the ruins of Ctesiphon 
has been found by Dr. Sprenger to have made of teak wood. J. A., 
Mai-Juin, 1863, p. 309. 

416) Under Usurtasen III. of the twelfth dynasty, an expedition was 
made against the country of Houa (near Punt, between the Nile and 
the Red Sea, about Dongolah, Berber, or Khartum), but this was 
made by the Nile, not by sea. Cf. G. Maspero, lieviie Critique, 
15 May, I8i^i2, reviewing Bubastis (1887-89) of Edouard Naville, 
1891. Cf. also on Egyptian Journeys, Chabas et Goodwin, Voi/at/e 
d'uu Egyptien au XIV. Steele Ave n.e., 1868 ; W. Golonischefi", 
Sun un ancien conte Egijptien, of 2000 B.C. Verb. Orient. Congr., 
Berlin, 1881, II. ill. 100-120. 

423) The Chinese transfer of the name of the Sac(e under the Han 
dynasty way S a k, 1673 Bas., now read Sai in Pekinese, >SV/( in 
central Mandarine, Sak in Cantonese, and erroneously transcribed 
Sae or Sse, T:e in historical works by Europeans. Mr. T. G. Pinches, 
in the Ameriean Journal of ArelKrolof/;/, 1893, has described a 
Babylonian tablet, dated 539 B.C., showing the figure of an Indian 
humped ox, referred to in the inscription on the other side of it. 

441) Our section 117 was printed in July, 1892, of The Bahi/lonian 
Record. The P. A. J. Dclattre, Une fiotte de Sennacherib sur le 
Golfe Pcrsique, p. 18, article which appeared in the same month and 



360 ORIGIN OF THE EAKLY 

year in the Eevue des Questions Ristoriques, has come to the same 
conclusion about the Phoenician influence of that fleet on the sea 
trade. 

444) I had spoken of the Miih t'ien tze tchuen there on its former 
reputation, which the publication of Dr. J. Eitel has caused to 
reconsider. The geographical identifications which I have been 
able to make in the sections 284-296, show on the contrary that it is 
a most valuable relic of antiquity which has escaped the transcription 
of the Han commentators, and contains many characters which 
had ceased to be understood in later ages. 

455) In the descriptions of the Fairy Islands, the words " trees of 
pure white coral " are a mis-translation. The text says that the 
trees were like pure white silk and that their stems were of pearl, 
Shim-kao tchu Jean. Coral was not yet known, white pearls just first 
imported had the interest of novelty. 

474) Le detroit separante Java de I'lle de Babli a ete forme'en 1204 k 
suite d'eruptions volcaniques. Cf. Henri Courtais, Le Volcan <le la 
Malaisie, Sumatra-Java : Bull. Soc. Geogr., Toulouse, 1883, p. 521- 
529 ; Bull. Soc. Acad. Indo-Chin., 3, 527. 

477) It seems however that the statement of the Sha7i Hai Kiyuj on 
bamboos large enough to make boats growing on the Wei hills is 
not entirely improbable for that time. Marco Polo in Tchekiang 
speaks of the largest and longest canes that are in all Manzi (South 
China), " four palms in girth and fifteen paces in length." Cf. 
Yule edit. 2, vol. ii. 203. In Sze tchuen, according to Richtofen's 
Letters, bamboos are very large. Cf. E. Bretschneider, Botan. 
Sinic, ii. 565. Tung-Fang So, Shin y King, reported that in the 
vastness of the southern regions some p'ei bamboos of an enormous 
size (fabulous dimension given) were used to make ships. T. P., 
i>63, 6. Ktesias mentioned the fact that in India small boats were 
made of one bamboo, which could hold not more than three men. 
Cf. Pliny, Llist. Nat., xvii. 3 ; Ancient hidia as described hi/ Ktesias 
4he Knidian, by J. W. McCrindle, 1882, p. 71. At Yung-tchang, 
says the Kwan-tcki of the fourth century, there arc bamboos three 
feet round. Cf. T. P. Y. L., 963. 5 v. Dr. J. Edkins, Bamboos in 
North (jhina : Ch. Rev., has collected evidence of the former exist- 
ence of Bambu in Shantung, Honan, and South Shensi. The 
climate seems to have been warmer than at present. — The earliest 
European boats were nothing more than tree trunks hollowed out. 
Cf. 0. Schrader, Prehistoric Antiquities of the Ari/an Peoples, 
p. 278. 

479) Hwai nan tze gives the word for boat in the Y'^ueh and Shuh 
regions in the following statement : The bow of the Wu-hao, in the 
south-west borders, and the cross bow of the Ki-tze (valleys of West 

' Hunan), cannot shoot without string; the K'nui/, small boats, of 
Yueh, and the t'lUf/, long narrow boats of Shuh, cannot float without 
water. T. P., 348, 6. 

482) The Heh-tchi, or country of the black teeth, i.e., where they 



v>- or -i 




OHINESK CIVILISATION. 361 

chew betel, or lacquered their teeth, was beginning with Si-tu, the 
present Hue of Annam (cf. Nan tchon y wuh tchi: T, P. Y. L., 790, 
9r.), and the Lo, or naked people country, with the Malacca penin- 
sula and any of the Sunda Islands. 

4g2) In the wars of the states of Ts'u and of Wu, sixth century B.C.> 
the latter used boats to attack the former. In 525, according to the 
chronicle of Tso-Kiu, the king's vessel, called the ' Ultra Sovereign,' 
Vii hwani/, the vessel of our former kings, said an officer Wu, was 
temporarily seized by the troops of Ts'u, and retaken with great 
slaughter by the Wu soldiers. It was then the habit of dragging 
the boats to shore, and there it was taken. The men of Ts'u digged 
a ditch all around it, and along the channel between it and the 
river, piled lighted charcoal. Notwithstanding this the Wu 
troops could carry away the royal ship, which must have been 
small indeed. 

495) The water wheel innovated by Ma Kiun in 227-237 A.D. at 
Lob-Yang, and which children were turning. Fat or Fan-kii't (13308, 
cl. 159 Bas.), or flying cart. Cf. Fu-tze. T.P., 752, 7. The 
phonetic fan or fat used in the compound character is that for 
foreign. Liu-Tsih, of the Ming dynasty, in his commentaries on 
Kwan-tze, says however that it was the same thing as the yt-hui, 
5136-4937 Bas., which goes against the stream ; Khamj Id tze tien, 
s.v. In Sing and the Pendjab, the Persian bucket wheels in use 
there are called pe-cottah. Cf . Ed. Balfour, Cyclop, of India, ii. 377, 
380, and iii. 1064. 

498) In Delhi and Bundelkand, this water-raising implement is 
called d ah, du-gla, dulia (cf. Ed. Balfour, Cyclop of India, ii. 
380), which remind singularly the Babylonian words, and show 
from where India has derived it. 

504) Also : Fried. Wilh. Noack, Laotsee, Taotek-hing, aus dun Chin- 
esischen, Berlin, 1888, 61 pp. 

506) According to the description of Shuh, or Sze-tchuen, Shuh-tchi, ^ 
the ancient chiefs of the country used to wear their ears long 
stretched, Cf. T. P., 366, 2 r. and section 215. 

513) The history of Khotan {Pien Y tien, kiv. 55, which Remusat 
has translated), says that five lis from th6re was the Pima temple 
where Lao-tze, after having made the barbarians convert to his 
views became (a) Buddha (p. 20). Pao-poh tze=Ko-hung, of the 
fourth century, and the Wei-lioh of about 300 A.D., speak of the 
journey of Lao-tze to the west, 

517) Cf. also the chapter Ixi. of the Tao teh Kiny where another 
allusion is made to the Animal Mother (p'in). Dr. J. Edkins has 
given a short article on the i^'oreujn Origin of Taoism, in China 
Review, 1891, xix. 397-399, where he claims Babylonian and Hindu 
ideas in the Taoism. 

538) The latter statement must be restricted to the identification of 
the Five Tis with historical personages ; as the Five Regents of 
space which appear to have been worshipped long before the Han 



> 



362 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

dynasty, were explained by Confucius, according to tradition, as the 
genii of the five elements. Cf. on this point, C. de Harlez, Les 
Ileligions <le la Chine, Leipzig, 1891. p. 121, 138, 139 : Kujuf-tze kia 
yu, V. 3 ; trad. Harlez : B. & 0. R., vii. 1894. 

546) Mr, A. Reville, in Revue des Religions, 1893, has come again 
to the subject in reviewing Dr. de Harlez's work on La Reliiiion 
Chinoise, Apen-u hhtorique et critique, Leipzig, 1891, 8vo. 271 pp., 
but he has only been able to show that a proper acquaintance with 
the Chinese original texts is absolutely required for a study of this 
sort. Cf. the rejoinder of Prof, de Harlez in the Museon of Juin, 
1893. 

548) On widow burning recognised in India 600 B.C., and a trans- 
lation of the Sutras of Asvala Yana ; cf. Max Muller, Anthropolo- 
gical Reliffion, 1892, p. 241 sq. 

553) A woman was buried alive fsiiinj at the burial of Tchou Ling 
Wang in 545 B.C. Cf. T. P. Y. L., 50, 7 r. 

The sii'in practice of burying alive persons with a deceased 
sovereign seems to have been followed at Emperors' funerals much 
later than is here stated. The Kwoh she lioh, quoted by Palladius, 
N. C. B. R. A. S., X. 13, mentions the abolition of the practice in 
Japan in A.D. 646, and reproaches China with continuing it. But 
as stated in China Rerieiv, xviii. 261, there must be some mistake of 
date there. In our note 568, we have cited from the Ko-ji-ki, the 
suppression of the practice about A.D. 200. At his death in 1464, 
Ki-tchen, the Ming Emperor Yng Tsung, left instructions that no 
concubines should be siiin, i.e., buried alive. Cf. Li Tai Ti Wan;/ nien 
piao. In the geography of the Sung dynasty it is reported that 
among the Fu-t/i'i, in north of Corea, the practice of the princes was 
to slay several hundred people to be interred with a deceased ruler, 
China Reriew, xix. 287. 

Burying alive is a Persian custom, says Herodotus, vii. 1 14, who 
quotes several instances of such mode of human sacrifices, not at 
funeral, but for propitiating or thankoffering to Earth Gods. He 
quotes also an instance of the IVIagi sacrificing white horses to make 

. streams favourable, ibid. 113. On burying queens, servants and 

I slaves with a departed king among the Scythians ; cf. Herodotus, 

' iv. 71-2. They were however strangled before. 

650) On sacrifices of horses under the Ts'j^n last princes and the 
' Ts'iN dynasty, cf. Szema Tsien, She Ki, kiv. 28, fol. 16. On the 
altars of the four Tis, on which cf. note 538 supra, four foals were 
sacrificed, also a wooden image of a dragon-curved-tie-beamed 
chariot, Lun;/ liran kii't, 13287-4588-10840 Bas., with four horses. 
In 103 B.C. the living pony for sacrifices was replaced by a 
wooden image, save for the sacrifice of the fifth month. Cf. She 
Ki, kiv. 28, fol. 44 r. 

569) In confirmation of my opinion that the human sacrifice made 
in the nineteenth year of Duke Hi., i.e., 641 B.C., in Honan was a 
result of foreign influence from West Asia, I have just seen in a 
valuable paper. On star nainimj ainowj the ancient ( 'hinese, by Dr. J. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 868 

Edkins, Chitia Review, xvi. 339, that T2( yi't refers it to the practice of 
the Persian religion. He was a famous commentator of the classics 
who lived in A.D. 222-284, according to Mayers, Ch. E M., 684. 
On the same subject, cf. also J. Edkins, Persia?i Sacrifices in China : 
China Review, 1891, xix. 55-6, and F. Lenormant, Chaldean Magic, 
p. 531. In 532 the Tso tchuen, X. x. 3, says : " Ping-tze, of Lu, 
invaded Kiil and took Kang. In presenting his captives, he for the 
first time sacrificed a human victim at the altar of PoA." The fact 
was not approved. Kiii was narrowly connected with the foreign 
colonists of the Gulf of Kiao-tchou. 

586) Prof. Ch. de Harlez has written an elaborate paper on Le Style 
de Kony-foH-tze, Koni/-tze-a-t-il interpule le Shu King et compose le 
Tchun-tsiu: in the T'oung Pao, Juillet, 189;-!, p. 243-297. He 
shows that none of the peculiarities of the style of Confucius appears 
in the first, second, third, and beginning of the fifth book of the 
Shu King, and he concludes therefrom that the Book of History has 
not been interpolated by the Sage of Lu. And with regard to the 
Tchim-tsiu, Dr. De H., wants to show that references are made by 
the Sage to another Tchun-tsiu, which would have been lost, but the 
suggestion seems difficult to accept, considering the care of his 
disciples for all he had taught them. 

592) Prof. De Harlez has called my attention to the fact that in the 
words " he retained and developed,'' the last is an overstretched 
translation of Prof. J. Legge, of the character Kiu, 8705 Bas., 
which means "to extol" and not develop." Confucius therefore 
may not have altered the Shu King, save by substitutions of 
characters in transcribing it. But nothing shows that he has not 
suppressed parts of it still existing in his time. Fragments which 
have been preserved suggest that he did so. Furthermore it is 
rather suggestive in favour of this view that several of the very 
parts which are missing are exactly those where we should have 
expected views and circumstances contrary to his philosophy. Cf. 
the list of the original hundred books of the Shu King in the preface 
attributed to him. He apparently only transcribed the parts which 
he approved. Twan Yuh-Tsai in his work Ku-iven Shang shu siuen y, 
in the last century has collected a large amount of information on 
the subject. 

602) Ti Tchih was only heir associate and did not rule, cf. § 364. 

614) The adverse circumstances of the Chinese state or states, ac- 
cording to the period, hardly permitted any serious study of their 
ancient traditions. During the Hia and Shang dynasties their 
dominion was from time to time at so low an ebb, and in so con- 
stant a state of warfare, either internal or with the border tribes, 
that it did not allow science and literature to flourish. During the 
short period of power of the Tchou dynasty the chief object was to 
enhance their glory. Then came the period of Wonderism, Taoism, 
Neo-Taoism, and Confucianism which we have described. On the 
other hand we are aware that many ancient books have disappeared. 

627) Lieh-tze speaks of Siang-tze of Tchao who ruled in 549-426 



864 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

B.C. Cf. T.P., 869, 3. Hu-tze as a name for the teacher of Lieh-tze 
is rather suggestive. Although written with a character seldom 
used, Hu is homonymous of Hu the West Asiatics, and suggests 
that in Hu-tze we should see a makeshift for Hu-tze, the bearded 
foreigner, inasmuch as the bulk of notions, ideas, and legends in 
Lieh-tze's teaching is originary from the Erythroean Sea through 
the Erythrcean traders and colonists in Shantung. 

650) We know that at Tfiih Moh there was a special calendar, Tsie7i 
Ikui Shu: T. P., 1(5, 9 '., and that in later times, i.e., before our 
fifth century, while making excavations there, one found in an 
ancient funeral mound, a golden bull. Cf. Liu Kiang Shu, Y Yuan : 
T. P., 811, y) r. Can this have been an idol of the Erythroean Sea- 
traders and colonists ? It looks like it. 

651) The custom of cold food was suppressed only in the fifth century 
by Wei Wu Ti ; cf. Mayers, Ch. II M., 253. Another custom, that 
of the Easter Eggs, ornamented and coloured, boiled and given 
away, was probably introduced at the same time. The oldest author 
on the subject is Tze-Hia of the fifth century B.C., who is quoted in 
the book on Kumn-tze, cf. T. P., 928, 6. Dr. G. Schlegel, Chinesisrhe 
Braiiche und spiele in Europa, 1869, p. 5, and Easter Bfffjs in China: 
N. and 0., Hong Kong, 1868, p. 21-22, was the first to call atten- 
tion to the custom. Cf. also J. J. M. de Groot, Les Fetes d Emoui, 
i. 220-9. 

665) Dr. J. Edkins, in Worship of the Gods of Fire, a note from the 
China Review, which he has kindly sent me, has attributed this 
worship to a Persian influence. 

671) Among the Avestic notions introduced at that time we may also 
mention the figure of a four yellow-eyed animal dispelling bad 
spirits at funerals. Cf. Zend-Avesta, Vendidad, Fargard, viii. 41 : 
ed. Darmesteter, ii. 123, and Tehou-li, xxxi. 28, ed. Biot, ii. 225. 
Prof. C. de Harlez, The Four-eijed Dot/s of the Avesta, 1886: B. & 
0. R., i. 36-8, 64, thinks that the Avestic notion was derived from 
Western Tartary. On the later development of the above super- 
stition in China, cf. J. J. M. de Groot, Tlie ReUtjious System of China, 
1892, i. 161-2. It may have been introduced earlier, i.e.. by the 
TcHou themselves, but the evidence is too late to prove it. 

684) The Yan;/ siii was spoken of by Tchwang-tze of the 'ourth 
century ; cf. T. P. Y. L., iii. 4 /•. 

688) A fire-syringe from the extreme south-east of the Malay penin- 
sula has been sent over here ; cf. F. W. Rudler, in -J. A. I., 1 ^93. 
Cf. par. 229 for a knowledge of pyrite in 220 B.C. It would s-'em 
that it was long known amongst the Tartars. For instance, ihe 
Toba Tartars relate that fire was invented by Ulgan's three daughters 
striking iron against a stone. Cf. W. Radioff, Proben der Vollxsliit. 
den Turk. Siberiem, i. 286, Folklore Journal, Sept., 3 892, iii. 318. 
A Mongol hymn is addressed to Mother Ut, Queen of Fire, whose , 
father is hard steel and mother is Silex ; cf. Goblet d'Alviella, ; 
Histoire Religieuse du Fen, 1887, p. 81. 



i 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 365 

691) Cf. also C. ele Harlez, On I'liUosniihr I'octc da IXe Szecle, 
Tchuann-tze : Museon, 18v32, xi. 5-16, 116-128. 

697) We ought to have recorded here in the text that in the fifth 
century Yakut rubies from Badakshan, pearls from the Persian 
Gulf, mother-of-pearl from the Erythr;ean Sea were among the 
staple articles imported at the emporium of Shantung ; cf. par. ID'.*, 
203, notes 750, 767, 772. Mother-of-pearl was used to adorn the 
tomb of Duke Yu of Tsi\', who died in 419 B.C. ; cf. Si KUui tsa Id: 
T. P., 808, 7 r. 

joj) Pan Ku, in the Taien Ran Shii, Kiao Ki tchi, has given the 
same statement as Szeraa Ts'ien, about the Eight Gods, from 
India. 

715) Cf. also J. Darmesteter, Le Zend-Ai-esta, 1892, i. 13-14. The 
list of thirty-three Ratus was given in one of the Nasks, the l'<'.j(i<j, 
according to the Diiikdrt, viii. 7, 17 ; Paldavi Texts, by E. W. West, 
iv. 1892, p. 18. The oldest references to these fabulous thirty-three 
beings in Chinese literature occurs in the Tchou shu. The Heavenly 
and Terrestial Kings of p. 23 mpra do not seem to have been intro- 
duced before that time, probably with the ten Ki. 

719) The story of Nll-Kwa is given in the Lieh-tze as a quotation 
from Hia-Koh of the Shang dynasty ; cf. T. P., ii. 2. 

722) The knowledge of some narcotics seems to have been also 
introduced by the same channel. For instance, aconitum was 
known first in the fourth century, and in that part of China under 
the name of Otii, modern Wu-tou, crow's head, from the Skr. Ati- 
visha, Telug. J^t-vassa : cf. Tchun-tdu Juni iju and other works in 
T. P. Y. L., 990, 1-2 : cf. note 1012, on a later introduction. 

729) Wang-tze-nien, Shih ij luh, of the fourth century, has preserved 
a most curious tradition about the men of Muk-tu, Magadha, 
the country of Sila, as reported by him. His description 
answers exactly to the figure of a Hindu deity, such as Siva or 
Mahadeva, as figured in Moor's Hindu Pantheon, pp. 24, 45, 
82, 104. 

731) Magnifying glasses were made in Assyro. -Babylonia as early as 
the seventh century, and probably long before ; cf. Perrot-Chipiez, 
Histoire de I' Art, vol. ii. p. 718. In Greece, cf. E. Egger, 2Um. hist, 
anc. 136, 415. 

732) We must add here that some chrysolite from Kutcha=-St Wamj- 
Mii was presented to King Tchao of lV« = Tchih Ii, in 311 B.C., by 
the north route; cf. Wang-tze-nien, Shih-i/-ki: T. P., 178, 1-2; 
M. Gueluy, Description de la Chine Oecidentale : Museon, Juin, 
188'), p. 303 ; the fame of this kind of stone came to the ears of 
Mandeville ; cf. Globe, 8 Aout, 182(; ; V. Fournel, O.C, ii. 156. 

734) On the name Hu, the word Hu means properly d e w 1 a p, that 
which hangs under the chin of a wolf, S]ii Kin;/ I. xv. od. 7 ; of a 
bull, Shicoh wen: or of objects [Sliih Minn) like hooked spears, 
Tchou Ii, &c. Hence its application to old people, because of their 
hanging chin and neck, and by contempt to foreign bearded races. 



366 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

741) Tvh'u of HiA, c. 1855-1838 B.C., successor of Shao Kang, is 
reported to have introduced buff-coats in China, through his rela- 
tions with the Tung-hu Kiueh-Kumj, of North Shansi ; cf. Mih-tze ; 
Shi-pen. T. P., 355 ; 1, 6 v. Tchm lin wu ku fit : T. P., 356, 3 v. 
Tso tchuen, V. xxviii. 8 ; X. xv. 6 ; XL iv. 4. Yuen Yuen, Tsih ku 
tiJiai tchung ting y ki kwan tchih, 1804, i. 4, According to the 
legendary account in our p. 319, some sort of mail-coats were known 
in the west at the time of Hwang-ti. 

748) The Trhou-pi says that the sun shines at a distance of 81 myriads 
of //, T. P., iv. 2. The number eight there is ominous, and suggest 
that the statement has come from the same source as that of Eratos- 
thenes' (B.C. 276-196) calculation giving the distance of the sun 
as over eight hundred thousand stadia, 804,000,000. The source 
was probably Chaldean. 

762) The genuine Asbestos is not yet known from the Dutch Eastern 
Archipelago. On Timor, near Atapupo, occurs however the so-called 
serpentine asbestos which externally often is much alike to the true 
asbestos, but differs chemically (note of Dr. A. B. Meyer, of Dresden). 
The external resemblance was quite sufficient for the assimilation 
made in the reports. As Timor stands last of the Sunda islands 
just south of the Banda Sea and Moluccas, we may understand that 
the sea traders were then passing there, and thus reached the native 
countries of the nutmeg and clove. 

785) Yng--Shao, of the second century, says that the Hwang-tvhl 
were in the south beyond Jeh-Nan=Nhit-nam ; and the Si gi'i tchuan 
connects them with the Tiao-tchi near the Western Ocean ; cf. 
Khang-hi tze tien, cl. 65. Tiao-tchi were near the Persian Gulf. 
A garbled quotation given without source says that from the Kan tu 
ho state you go by ship about two months to the Hwang-tchi state, 
where the customs are much like those of the Tchu-yai (Hai-nan) ; 
cf. note 1037. I suspect this Kan-tu-lu to be the same as Kan-to-li, 
modern Palembang, of Sumatra, on which, cf. Groenevell, Malay 
Archipelago, p. 60, and L de Rosny, Peuples Orientau.v, p. 235-6. 

796) This informal entry of arrivals from the South in 591, indicates 
most probably the introduction of several things from India, men- 
tioned § 209. 

80;) Cf. also H. Giles, Chinese Dictionary, s. v. Tou, Nos. 11427 and 
11429. 

811) We may add also the jaggery, or sugar of palm, par. 252, 
peacocks, note 1025, before 300 B.C. 

The game of Siang-ki, which is much like our chess, was intro- 
duced about that time, as shown by its first mention in the elegies 
of Ts'u ; cf. Ts'u-tze, tchao hwun. Meng Tch'ang Kiun of Ts'i, 
who died in 279 B.C., was an adept at the game (Liu-hiang, Shivoh 
guen). On subsequent instances, cf. H. F. W. Holt, Notes on the 
Chinese game of the Chess, J. R. A. S., 1885. See also Karl Himly, 
Anmerkunffen in Beziehung auf das Schach- und andere Brettspiele : 
Z. f. D. M. G., 1887, xli. 461-484. The Wei ki, a sort of game of 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 367 

draughts, well known at the time of Confucius, had been attributed 
by the Voh ivuh uhl to the age of Yao and Shun, but Ho Fah-tcheng 
a century later, in the Tsin tchun;/ hin;/ shii remarked that the attri- 
bution was inexact, as the game of Wei ki had not been introduced 
before the reign of Shou-Sin, the last ruler of the Shang-yn dynasty, 
of. T. P., 753, 1-5. 

825) Dr. P. Piassetsky, travelling from Han-tchung fu to]Lan-tchou 
fu passed by another route, viz.: by Mien hien, Lio/i-i/an;/ Men, 
Huei hien and Ts'in tchou ; from there two roads branch off; one, 
the shortest, is available only for horses and pack animals ; the 
other, which was taken by the Russian expedition, and is a carriage 
road, passes through Fuh-kiamj hien, Kmuj-tchanij fu and lY T'au 
tchou to Lau tchou fu ; cf. his Voya/je a tracers la Monqolie et la 
Chine, 1883, pp. 340-379. 

876. Chapter VII. f continued), Part III., pp. 203-263. 

Additions and Emendations. 

866) The two characters tchou and tan are much like one another, 
whence the confusion. 2\ui is cinnaKar. It was used for painting 
purposes by the Romans, as shown by H. Davy, in Annales deChimie, 
1815, clvi, 72, &c. 

867) Xo silk in ancient N. W. China. This is shown by the report 
of Li-sze to the future First Emperor in 236 B.C. The inquiry 
carried on in T. de L., The Silk Goddess and her Legend, 181)1, par. 
14, had led me to the same conclusion. The report of 86-73 B.C., 
mentioned in F. Hirth, Roman Orient, p. 226, mentions silk only in 
the Yen, Yxi, and Ho districts, i.e., Shantung, Honan, and Shansi 
S. Not Kansuh as mistaken there. 

875) Cf. also De Guignes, Histoire des Huns, ii. 19-20. A. Wylie, 
History of the Hiung-noo, 405-6. 

879) P. Gaubil in his Traite de la Chronologie Chinoise, p. 65, remarks ■ 
that " Li-sze and the Emperor She Hwang-ti were infatuated with 
the principles of the Taoist sect, and it is therefore probable that a 
strict search was not made for the books of that sect. 

884) Cf. also the Japanese history Koh ski ryak, in H. F. Balfour, 
Leaves from my Chinese Scrap Book, pp. 24-27; Le Lotus, viii. 52. 
Some interesting details are given in another chapter of Szema 
Ts'ien, She Ki, 118, 11 v., which made this expedition a real attempt 
at colonising ; 3000 people, goods, cereals, &c., and experienced 
operatives were sent. 

914) It seems that we may recognise an interesting synchronism of 
the mission sent to India by Ming-ti in search of Buddhist infor- 
mation, 64-5 A.D., in a tradition reported by the pilgrims Hiuen- 
F'ang and Hwei-lun. Under the reign of Kanishka, about twenty 
men having come from East China, or Sze tchiien, to pay homage, 
he assigned to them three convents as residences during their 



' OF THK ^y 

UNIVEBr:iTY 



368 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

sojourn according to the three seasons. In Kapisa the convent was 
called S/ta-lo-kia (which Beal understood as Serika). Their winter 
residence was called Trliinapati, near the Sutledj. They introduced 
the peach and the pear, hitherto unknown in India, and which 
were called from them Tchhiani and Tchinaradja putra. The 
peach has preserved that name to the present day ; cf. S. Beal, 
Uncords of Western Countries, i. 57, 174; Lifeof Bluen Ts'ang, xxvi. 
54 ; and Alex, Cunningham, Arch. Sure, of India, xiv. 54. The 
peach of China had been transplanted in Persia in the fourth 
century, supra p. 47. The p e a r is originary of anterior Asia, not of 
China. The Chinese mission consisted of Ts'ai-yu, Ts'in King, of 
the rank of Po-sze, Wang Tsun, and others, altogether eighteen 
men ; cf. Beal, Buddhist Literature, 3. 

923) In the valley of the Ak-Baital river, near the Rang-Kul in the 
Pamirs, Lord Dunmore saw immense beds of sulphur on the slopes 
of the mountains ; cf. his narrative, Tlie Pamirs, 1893, ii. 179. 

926) Stone-coal, Greek, Lithanthrax ; Chinese, Shih-t'an, was then 
also known for the first time in China. Theophrastes, 371-286 B.C., 
says that in his time, the founders and smiths of Greece made a 
great use of fossil coal from Liguria and Elide, which they called 
stone-coal. Hwai-nan-tze, who was acquainted with all the Greek 
notions then reaching China, was the first Chinese writer who 
spoke of coal ; cf. T. de L., On the ancient history of Glass and Coal 
in China: T'oung-pao, Sept., 1891. 

The death of Hwai-nan-tze took place in 122 B.C. according to 
his biography in Szema Ts'ien, She Ki, kiv. 118, fol. 7-18, and the 
political circumstances which have led to his suicide. The date 
of 122 B.C. is given rightly by Mayers, Ch. It. M., 412. It is stated 
also in the Lih-tai Ti Wan;/ nien piao in that year. Dr. De Harlez, 
Textes Taoistes, 1891, p. 171-2, thinks that he must have lived later, 
but the Chinese authorities are most precise on the subject. 

934) We may mention also amongst other things ; the Calippus period 
of seventy-six years, called pu, and attributed to Li-fang (a visibly 
crippled and approximative transfert of the name of the Greek 
astronomer ; cf. P. Gaubil, Traite de t' Astronomic Chinoise : Souciet, 
1732, iii. 21 ; Th. Ferguson, Chinese Chronolotjy, p. 229. It was 
employed by Szema Ts'ien for his calendar of 104 B.C. I do not 
know the passage of the text of Hwai-nan-tze on the circulating 
movement of the earth in the heavens alluded to by P. Cibot and 
L'Abbe Grosier. But I may quote the following: "The sky is 
like the awning of a carriage where the earth is the carriage and 
the seasons the horses." T. P., 17, 5. Dr. J. Edkins has a note on 
The Earth a Sphere: China Review, 119-20. In Lu she Tchun-tsiu, 
a century before Hwai-nan-tze, I find a similar idea expressed as 
follows : The sky is the wheel of the earth — chariot ; in winter it has 
gone to the extreme end and then it comes back ;" cf. T. P., 2, 3 r. 
During the reign of Han Wu-Ti, one Loh Hia-hung, in 104 B.C., 
made a figure of the heavens after the Kai-t'ien, or vault of heaven 
method ; the sky was fixed, divided into seasons, and the earth was 



CHINESK CmLISATION. 869 

revolving in the centre. The degrees had been marked by Sien-yii 
Wan jen ; cf. T. P., 2, 10 v. 

968) J. T. Reinaud, Helations de V Empire Romain avec VAsieOnentale, 
pp. 181, 186, 189-194, quoting Florm, iv. 12, and Horat. iii. 29, iv. 
15, has shown that travellers from the country of the Seres, after 
four years' journey, visited the Roman Emperor Augustus at Samos 
with an Indian Embassy in 20 B.C. 

975) The ostrich eggs were an imported article of trade and industry, 
notably among the Egyptians and Phoenicians, who used to decorate 
them with paintings and carvings ; cf. Perrot-Chipiez, Hist. Art An- 
tiqxie, iii. 855-61. The circumstance is interesting, as it has had most 
probably an influence on ancient Chinese art. Some of them were 
sent to China in several instances ; the dates of 115 B.C , 101 A.D., 
&c. (cf. j 245), are mentioned in history. 

980) The ran-ku iji'i ti Tchao slin, or Records of Pan-ku and his 
brother Tchao, report that an officer of Tou, the commander in chief 
in Turkestan, A.D. 87, conveyed 700 pieces of cloth of various^ 
colours, and some su-Jio/i perfume sent by the Yueh-ti, i e., storax 
made in Syria ; cf. T. P., !'82, 1 c On the su-hoh, cf. F. Hirth, 
China and the Roman Orient, pp. 263-6r E. Bretschneider, Ancient 
Chinese and Arabs, p. 20. H. F. Hance, Notes and Queries, iii. 31. 
Dan. Hanbury, On Stora.r : Pharm. Journ., 1857, xvi. 

985) About Ngansi tchou of north-west Kansuh, the Description de la 
Chine Occidvntale, tr. M. Gueluy, Museon, Mars, 1885, p. 148, says : 
Ou suppose que hi se trouvait I'ancien royaume de Chord : les ren- 
seignements positifs manquent, mais il y a la une riviere du nom de 
choul. 

904) Another sort of precious spice had been sent by the same king 
in 98 B.C. ; cf. Tung Fang So, Shih tchou Ki : T. P., 8, 5. 

f^q8) Amber was an article of exchange produced by the Lendjahalous 
Islands, according to the Arab travellers of the ninth century ; cf. 
Reinaud, Relation, pp. 8, 16-7; also Magoudi, I. pp. 338-9. 

1000) The saltpetre, siao shih, and sulphate of copper, shik tam, are 
also mentioned by the F'an tze kijan as imported through the Lung 
tao ; T. P., 988, 2, 4. Siao, the Chinese term for saltpetre, is a 
trade word derived from Persian and Hindu shora : its first impor- 
tation from from India was by the Yh tchou route about 100 B.C. 
Cf. Pen tsao Kinrj, ibid. The Yh-tchou was first established about 
108 B.C. Saltpetre is extracted from an immense cave near Kung 
tia pin, north-east of the lake of Ta-ly fu, according to F. Gamier, 
Exploration en Indo-Chine, i. 521. 

1006) According to the Shih tao tchi topography of the ten provinces 
{tao) into which China was divided in the seventh century, by Liang 
Tai yen of c. 890 A D., the country of X(fou-loh, or at least the 
eastern part of it, extended to P'an tchou, i.e., the present Kao- 
tchoufuin Kuangtung west; cf. T. P., 172, 9 ; and Playfair, O.C., 
4980. The description of the two provinces of Nan-hai and Siang- 



370 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

kkm of Tchao-t'o show that they extended much beyond those first 
established by Jen Hiao spoken of in our note 1005. 

1024) In the Kilian Mountains of N^ith-west Tiliet, the Earl of 
Dunmore, The Pamirs, 1893, i. 236, saw '-a peacQckiijLue head, a 
magpie body, and the brightest of bright red tails. The birds are 
very numerous on the plains of Western Tibet, although we saw but 
two all the time we were riding through that country." 

1076 In A.D. 84, the Chinese government commissioned Tcheng-hung, 
then commanding in Kiao tela, on his own report, to establish officially 
the route by Ling-ling, present Yung-tchou, and Kuei-i/am/, also in 
Hu-nan, for the facility of the trade from that county ; De Mailla, 
iii. 384. This was the route by the Tchi-ling pass and Y-tchang, 
south of it, on the head waters of an affluent of the north river of 
Kuang-tung ; cf. G. James Morrison, Joivrney in the Interior of 
China: Proc. R. G. S., 1889, p. 152. Tunfi-i/eh, present Fuhtchou, 
then the port for intercourse by the trading ships of Nhitnam, with 
the Chinese authorities, was said to be too far away. 

II 23) The nutmeg. Chin, nah-tou-kou, ju-tou-kou (cf. jadikai Tamil, 
jadikain Telugu) does not appear, at least under that name, in 
Chinese literature before the ^an fang ts'no juuh tchnang of 300 
A.D. Cf. T. P., 971, 6 V. The name often appears curtailed in 
tou-koii ; according to the Wii-fi-h', in the years 220-227 A.D., the 
Wei of Loh-yang sent to Nanking to get some of these nuts. The 
C. /?. Acad. Scienc.y xxxiv. 775, state that nutmegs have been 
found in the shells of late Egyptian mummies. Should the state- 
ment be true we could not be surprised since the traders in clove 
must have known them. 

II 28) Cf. also Les Jiu'fs ct les Chinois, by M. Cordonnier : Soc. de 
Geogr. Oran., 1892, xii. 52, 123- 9. 

1 137) Herewith an earlier instance of pleasure boats manned by 
ladies of the palace. In the year 650 B.C. we read that " the 
Marquis of Ts'i and Ki of Ts'ai, one of the ladies, were in a boat on 
a lake in the park, when she made it rock. The Marquis was afraid, 
changed colour, and forbade her ; but she persisted ; cf. Tso tchucn, 
V. iii. 7. 

377. Chapter VIII. Excursus, pp. 264-290. 

Additions and Emendations. 

1168) It was probably at that time also and not later that Muh 
Wang was offered by envoys from the country of Kiu-sii, modern 
Wakhan), some objects in amber, according to a tradition which I 
have overlooked. On that country, cf. note 1187. 

1 1 84) In perusing the legends concerning Si Wang-mu in mytholo- 
gical books I find also the name of Kam-mu, modern A7;/ -/;/«, 
(x o 1 d e n M o t h e r, for the same being. This is an unexpected 
confirmation of the name given in our text. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 871 

IT 8 7) We have overlooked here an important instance of distant 
intercourse with the west. The TchuJi shu ki iiicu, sixteenth year 
of Yax), reports that some Kiu-sou people came to China. In the . 
Yn-kunir the same name occurs again as importing carpets and furs, 
with the Kucn-lun and the Sih-tchi in a statement'Tntetided To In- 
clude the most distant lands then known in the west. The Kii'i- 
sou or Kid-sn, 5078-2550 or 3522 or 8i76 Bas., was also called 
Fu-km-su, and later P'o-Iian, 11572-4850 Bas., modern Wa-kban,- 
in the Pamirs ; the Sui sine : T. P., 793, 8 i'., says that it was 
situated 500 // west of the Tsung-ling's entrance and lOOO //' from 
.S'«-/<:V/=Kashgar. The identification is therefore clear. Commu- 
nications with the same country are mentioned under the 
reign of Tchou Muh-wang and in 571 B C. In Kii\-su and Fit-kii'i- 
su we can recognize the name of Waksh, the river of WakhaP, of 
which the Greeks have made Oxm, and the Tiirks Aksjt, as has 
been suggested. 

1223) Cf. also J. Edkins, On Chinese names for Boats 2^nd Boat 
Gear with remarks on the Chinese nse of the Mariner's Compass : 
J. N. Ch. Br. R. A. S., Shanghai, 1877, xi. 123-142. 

1 234) A common saying in China is that the first armillary sphere 
was made by Tsien-yoh of the Liu-Sung dynasty, 420-477 B.C. 
Cf. J. H. Stewart-Lockhart, Mannal of Chinese Quotations, 
p. 293. Cf. add. 1*34, p. 368. 

1238) In the name of Fnh Mnh, the Muh is the same that appeared 
afterwards as a name of the district established 50 B.C. in exactly 
the same spot by the newly-established Governor-Generalship at 
Wii-Iev ; cf. note 965. 



§ 378. Chapter IX. Meeting of Objections, pp. 291-315. 

1254) Even supposing that some decisive evidence should be found 
in favour of a genuine antiquity of some parts of the Chinese 
astronomy, this would not affect the western origin of the Chinese 
civilisation, since Dr. G. Schlegel contends that the names of his 
asterisms refer only to the stone age. 

1259) A shooting star is held among the Karens to be "a youth 
going to meet a maiden-star ;" cf. Dr. Mason, Notes on the Astron- 
omy of the Karens : J. A. S. B. ; A. R. McMahon, The Karens of 
the Golden Chersonese, 1876, p. 233. This looks like a parallel 
explanation of the Chinese myth of the Cowherd and Weaving 
Damsel, inasmuch as the Karengs are originary from China, 

1262) According to De Mailla, O. T., viii. 643, Chinese astronomy 
was rectified fifty times between Hwang-ti and the Sung dynasty, 
and fourteen times during the 2.3'i years following. 



372 ORIGIN OF THE EAKLY 

§379. Chapter X. Essay of Reconstruction, pp. 816-337. 

1 3 13) It may be that some foundation in fact exists historically for 
the vague traditions that the Bak Sings or their ancestors had been 
submitted for three centuries to the successors of S argon =Shen- 
nung before the accession of Hu Nak Kunte, and that seventy reigns 
or generations had elapsed between Shennung himself and the latter. 
Three hundred years before 2332 beginning of Hwang-ti, make the 
twenty-seventh century, which befits the age of Dungi, under whose 
reign the Bak Sings claim to have learned the art of writing. 
Assyriologists esteem that Dungi must have lived before 2500 B.C , 
and some give 2800 as his possible date. Now,!as the second point, 
seventy reigns at an average of twenty years a reign would make 
1400 years, 3750 before Hwang-ti. The date of Naramsin, son and 
contemporary for a time of his father Sargon is given by 
Nabonidus as 3750 B.C. The coincidence in the two cases it rather 
suggestive. 



CHlNESk CIVILISATION. 373 



1 



CHAPTER XII. 

Chronological Sketch of the Pre-Chinese and Imported 
Civilisations of China in Antiquity. 



I. — Native Civilisation of the Pre-Chinese, 

380. Before proceeding to the arrivals in China let us first enu- 
merate briefly what the civilisers found in their adopted country. 
The civilisation of the Pre-Chinese populations, when the Chinese Baks 
arrived into the land, and for long afterwards in the parts of the 
country which remained independent and outside their influence, was 
heterogeneous. Several distinct races, originary from the north and 
from the south, were occupying the basin of the Yang-tze kiang and 
that of the Hwang-ho. They had already come near one another, 
with their respective idioyncracies and acquisitions from their native 
lands, but they had not intermingled, and the country was sparsely 
populated. Notwithstanding the remote times we are referring to, 
i.e., some 4000 years ago, the racial distinctions of later ages seem 
to have been as clearly marked as they long remained afterwards. 
No leading state, nor any great power had arisen among them. As 
they appear to us, they seem to have been in that stage of everlasting 
immanence of the undeveloped and low civilised communities which 
change only when an outside influence arouses them to competition 
and progress. 

381. The information on the subject is poor and scanty; only a 
few peculiarities have been stated, or may be inferred from the state- 
ments at our disposal, but they are sufficient to show how diflerent 
was that heterogeneous civilisation from that imported into the 
country by the Chinese Bak Sings. 



374 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

The dwellings of the native tribes consisted either of caves dug ovit 
in the loess country,i380 especially in Shensi, or of houses on piles (in 
north Kiangsu and Anhwui, &c.)/3'^i or of various sorts of sheds, or 
of large houses for a whole community (in the Centre, &c.) As vege- 
table food they used to eat Italian millet, sctaria t'tal., soy beans, rice, 
jujubes, radishes, peaches, apricots, plums, oranges, &c., and as 
intoxicating bevemge some spirit made from rice.^^^- 



They made fire by the pToughingor by the sawing process ; their 
weapons and tools were .either in scorched wood or in stone, some 
having the peculiar shape commonly called shouldered celts ; they had 
bows of the plain type and arrows in wood or in bamboo, with or 
without stone-heads. Some of them knew copper, and others, chiefly 
in Szetchuen, knew iron and natural steel. Spinning and weaving 
grass and silk, dyeing with indigo and several other plants, lacquer, 
hand- made pottery, &c.,i383 ^gj-e among their rude industrial accom- 
plishments. 

Some knew the five tones of music, and others had special taste for 
clinkstones, numerous in the country. i^^^ The Tchu-siang tribes had 

•rr-a live-chord harpsichord. i^'^s Their tra^Jg was made by barter, and 
also with cauries, which they employed for ornaments. i^"" Tattooing 
was practised by many tribes for the same purpose. They had no 

\ written characters, but they had some embryo-writings, such as cup- 
marks on rocks and cliffs, knotched sticks and knotted cords. '^s? They 
were addicted to Shaimnism, and generally worshipped spirits of 
rivers, mountains, and of everything in nature. i388 Some were star- 
gazing, and had connected the yearly recurrence of stars in certain 
positions with their occupations, principally for sowing and harvest 
times, which for some plantations occurred twice in each year, 

; and therefore caused a frequent confusion in later symbolism ; the 
four and three stars of the Great Bear, called also the Seven Directors, 
appear to have been for them an object of peculiar attention under 
that respect. ^389 

r Their marriage rules were various, as shown in after times ; some 
' were polygamous,^39o others had gynccocratic institutions, and many 

had no family names. For the funerals they used to dispose of their 
jdead either by putting them in the bush on the soil, or on piles or 
/trees. ^3^^ Others, especiaUij in the east, placed them in ei/if-like urns, 
{ of earthenware, which urns in their turn were jmt severally in larger 

ones,^^^'^ 



UN, 



^ ^^UFORH\N 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 375 

382. Much more could be added about the customs and habits of 
the native tribes, should we have sought information from sources of 
latiT date, but we have been careful to avoid this convenient means, 
as some of the other peculiarities may have arisen in course of time 
through outside influences of variour sorts. We think it better not to 
encroach any further than we are afraid to have already done on late 
illustrations of the brief and limited suggestions of the primitive 
period. Nothing at all was known for a long time of the populations 
inhabiting the south of the Yang-tze Kiang, and therefore it is sufficient 
to say that they were not better than those north of the great river. 

Notes — 

1380) Sht King, III. i. and modern travellers. 

1381) Cf. the Tsao or Nest-dwellers as a soubriquet of a population 
of Anhwui. Shu King, iv. 2, 1 ; Tchuh shu ki m'cn, Hia, xvii ; 
and modern descriptions Chinese and European. Also Kni shan tu 
by Sun Kia : T. P., 78, 2 v. 

1382) As shown by the story of Y-Tek in the Tchcn Kivoh tsiJi and 
the Shi Pen : T. P., 843, 1. Also in Mayers, Ch. R. A/., 230 and 
682. Y-Teh had made some of this spirit by order of a wife of 
Shun. Shao Kang {c. 1875 B.C.) is reputed to have first made 
some spirit beverage from a variety of the set aria italic a. 

1883) Cf. the Tao, or potters' country in C. Shansi, conquered by 
Tchuan Hiiih after c. 2213 B.C., and the Yao, also potters, further 
south. 

1384 Cf. S/in King, II. i. 23, 24, and iv. f. 10. Kuei, name of the 
appointed director of music by Shun, was the chief of a native tribe; 
we find it in 634 B.C. settled in the present Kwei-tchou fu similarly 
written in the extreme north-east of Sze-tchuen ; cf. Xso tchuen 
Tchnn tsiu, Hi kung xxvi. 6 ; and Playfair, Cities and Towns, 
n. 3838. 

1385) Luh she, Tcliun tsiu : T. P., 576, 3-5. 

1386) S/in King, Yii Kung ; cf. T. de L., TJic Silk Goddess of China 
and her Legend, % 9. Yh King, Kwa 61, in The Oldest Book of 
the Chinese, 1892, vol. i., p. xviii. 

1387) There is considerable evidence on this subject collected in my 
Beginnings of Writing in C. Asia, which it would be too long 
to reproduce here. That they had no written characters is shown 
by the complete absence of anything like a hieroglyphic inscription 
in China, and by the fact that all the natural products of the country 
had to be written by the newcomers with compound characters of 
their own script, while it would have been easier with a system open 
to any addition like their own to adopt any pictorial symbols pre- 
viously in existence for the objects in question. 



^ 



376 ORIGIN OP THE EARLY 

1388) For instance the Kin and Li on the left banks of the Hwang- 
ho in North Honan were strongly addicted to spirits worship. They 
were conquered by Tchuan-hiiih after c. 2213 B.C. And also among 
the Miao-tze. 

1389) Cf. supra § 309 and note 1234. 

1390) Yao, a Chinese, sent his two daughters in marriage to Shun, 
a Non^^inese ; cf. Shu King^ Yao tien, 12. And on the subject, 
cf. J. Kohler, Rechtsverglcichcndc Zkizzen : z. f. vergl. Rechtweis. 
viii., 1888, p. 80, and Edw. Westermarck, The History of Human 
Marriage, 1891, pp. 20, 396. 

1391) The first fashion (practised in Hupeh) is mentioned in the 
Yh King, Hi tze, it. 22 ; the second comes also from Chinese 

descriptions of native customs, such as in the Mao Man hoh tchi, 
iv., 8. 

1392) " In the time of Shun, of Yii, they used earthenware coffins," 
Li Ki, T'an Kung, I. i. 12. These urns were called op-ii (Chin, 
oh-yu). On a find of such ancient urns in A.D. 506 in South* 
Kiangsu, cf. She-hi : T. P., 780, 2 v. 



II. — Lmported Civilisation by the Chinese Bak Sings. 

388. The imported civilisation of the Baks, came into contact 
under the reign of Yao and Shun, with that of the indigenous which 
belonged to a low standard. We have already described briefly the 
last, and we must now examine the other in its complexity. 

The following lists compared with those given in Chapters IV. and 
v., with corrections in the following and especially in the eleventh 
chapters, differ from them thus far that they contain only, to the best 
of our knowledge, a series (much more complete) of the elements of 
•^vestern civilisation imported into China by the emigrants of circa 
2282 B.C., i.e., the Baks under the general leadership of HuNakKunte 
or Yu Nai Hwang- ti, and that it leaves to be entered under their 
respective dates in the present chronological sketch the items of the 
same and other sources that were introduced in later times. 

381. Comparative research into the Chinese traditions, checked by 
our knowledge, however incomplete it may be for the present, of the 
Chaldeo-Elamite culture, shows that among the many elements of 
western civilisation which the Bak Sings have imported with them 
from Ant grior Asia, we may enumerate mth great chance of historical 
accuracy all these items ; they correspond to the very stage of 
development and progress which had been reached in western Asia a 
little after the middle of the third millenium B.C., neither before. 



OHINESE CIVILISATION. 877 

afterwards, or elsewhere. A few of the entries cannot be identified 
with Chaldeo-Elamite antecedents, although clearly imported from 
Anterior Asia ; the civilisation of Babylonia and Elam was certainly 
paramount there, but it had not extended beyond its original centre 
over new lands and peoples without giving rise to local divergencies. 
Borrowed culture is seldom servile, and it requires and undergoes 
almost always a certain amount of transformation and adaptation to 
its new environment. Moreover every race has its own peculiarities \ 
and idiosyncracies, and we are well aware that the Bak Sings were no 
exception to the rule. 

385. With all reservation necessitated by the obscurity of a 
subject so remote in times, and the frequent one-sidedness and lateness 
of the literary information from which the inferences and evidence can 
be drawn, it seems to me, in the present stage of my inquiry after 
many years labour, that we can ascribe to the Bak Sings themselves : 
A fair complexion, blue eyes, no black hair, and no high cheek bones, 
artificial tapering of the head; the ancestral worship i^^^^ veneration y, 
of the sky -heaven, whose acknowledged son was their leader, T'ien- 
tze ; building in pise ;^38* clay- vaults for tombs •,^^^^ scorching the 
tortoise-shell for divination instead of the central Asiatic usual omo- 
platoscopy ;^396 3, special taste for jade ; important traditions concern- 
ing their relations with Chaldeo-Elamites and other princes of western > 
Asia;^^^'' that Tsang-kieh (old T'an-kih^Dungi)^^^^ was their first 
initiator in the art of writing, and that their leader did get some 
precious vases with inscribed tablets ; an adaptation of the Chaldean '" 
version of the deluge to the mountainous region of Puh-tchou-shan 
(=Badsakshan, modern Badakshan, through which they used to 
travel) •,^'^^^ the name of Hu Nak Khunte for their leader, i**^'^ and other 
things. 

Notes — 

1393) The Ancestral Worship appears in the first chapters of the 
S/ni King. Shun was appointed in the temple of Wcn-tsti, or 
accomplished ancestor, II. i. 4. Yil was also appointed in the 
temple of Shin Tsiing, or honoured spirits, II. ii. 19. Shun was 
worshipped in the Wen-Tsii temple, II. i. 14, and once coming 
back from a tour of inspection, went to the temple of Y tsn, or 
cultivated ancestor, where he offered a single bullock, II. i. 8. 

1394) Cf. W. Simpson, Tr. S. B. A., 1888, ix. 2 ; Shi King, III. i. 
Ode 3 ; Tso tchnen, VII. xi. 2. 



378 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

1395) Still practised to the present day in the Pamirs. 

1396) On the Omoplatoscopy, Mr. Woodvilie Rockhill has collected 
some data in The Land of the Lamas. 

1397) I have utilised them in the Reconstruction, Chapter X. 

1398) Dungi is the Chaldean King renowned for his numerous in- 
scription, for whom Gudea conquered Anzan and Elam. Szema 
Ts'ien, S/ic Ki, i. 4, xxviii. 32, 43, has preserved the tradition that 
Hwang-ti obtained some valuable vases with written tablets. The 
Chinese text as usual is rather vague in its construction, but we 
may understand it as meaning that the written tablets were inside 
the vases, as was customary in Chaldea, Egypt, Greece, and Rome. 

1399) On Badakshan, cf. notes 1288, 1290, 1329. 

1400) Derived like that of Kudur Nakhunte, his contemporary, from 
that of Nakhunte, chief of the gods of Susiana ; cf. T. de L., The 
Onnmasti'c similarity of Nai-Hwang-ti of China and Nakhunte of 
Snsiana, 1890, and the Elamite inscription of Undas Arman where 
Nakhunte is called Sn/ta Annaf, caput deorum. 

386. When they arrived in the Flowery Land, the Chinese Bak 
Sings, besides their own achievements which we have just enumerated, 
were altogether acquainted through their relations with Chaldea 
and Elam, with the following elements of western civilisation which 
they introduced with them : — 

The sky as a vault and round, the earth like a square raft under- 
neath ; the sun, male, and the moon, female ; the five planets and 
some of their attributions ; the solar year and the twelve lunar months, 
with an occasional intercalary month to adjust it roughly; year 
divisions into twenty-four parts and into periods of five and ten days ; 
the division of the day in four parts and into fixed hours ; a certain 
use of a period of seven days ; four seasons in the year, the winter 
solstice as beginning of the calendar ; and the vernal equinox for the 
year; 

The four points of space with their symbols denoting a peculiar 
shifting, and their special colours ; many names of stars and constel- 
lations, twenty-four stellar points ; the sky as a figure of the earth 
surface ; probably the five elements ; 

Standard measures of length and weight, such as the half cubit 
and the mina ; balance scales ; the gnomon but probably not the 
clepsydra ; 

The zodiac with the name of its twelve objects, used as a cycle of 
twelve for years, and as part of a cycle of sixty ; the use of cycles, of 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 879 

ten, derived from the Akkadian numerals, of twelve, of sixty as a 
divisible unit, of seventy-two, &c. ; the decimal notation and local 
value of the figures ; the musical chromatic scale of twelve, &c. ; but 
they had no 19 -years cycle nor astronomical instruments ; 

Notions of hidden properties and harmonies of numbers, supersti- 
tions concerning certain lucky and unlucky days, belief in the repeti- 
tion of events after certain periods, special practises of divination such 
as oneiromancy, belomancy, the eight wands of fate, avoidance of 
regular figures, hundred as a standard number. 

387. They had learned from the same sources : — Building in clay- 
brick instead of stone ; stamping occasionally the bricks ; doors on 
sockets ; pillars for houses and great importance given to the roof ; 
orienting buildings by the sun shade ; special disposition of town-gates; 
erection of lofty terraces for astronomical purposes, and of large square 
altars ; brick vaults for tombs ; coracles, or skin -boats and rafts on 
inflated skins ; 

Making canals ; embanking rivers ; sinking wells ; boiling the 
brine ; works of irrigation for agricultural pursuits ; extensive hus- 
bandry ; 

And they brought with them the wheat and the barley, the 
small garlic, the vine, the common millet, &c. 

The composite bow, the archer's thimble, the sword, the potter's 
wheel, the mortar, the smith's bellows, the West-Asiastic plough, 
the plumb-line, the wedge, the balance-scales, manacles, ox-waggons, 
light and heavy with spoked wheels, one curved pole and yoke for 
animals abreast ; bells hanging from the animal ; a canopy over light 
chariots ; 

The use of gold, silver, copper, lead, and tin (but not of iron nor 
bronze), and the arts of casting them into vases, bells, war weapons, 
and other implements ; cinnabar ; 

Long dresses ; peculiar head-dress ; special emblems on their rulers' 
robes and royal staff with auspicious bird on top, and state umbrellas, 
fans, walking staffs, rings, personal seals ; shoes and sandals ; stools, 
bedsteads, and mats ; 

Customs of mulcts instead of corporal punishment, tattooing for 
ignominy ; cutting the left ear of slain on battlefield ; besmearing the 
war weapons with the blood of prisoners ; 



V 



380 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

Notions of eschatology (double soul) ; the nose as beginning of a, 
human being ; 120 years natural length of life ; importance of personal 
names and their inscription for preservation by after generations ; 

As domesticated animals they had the ox as driving beast, the horse 
and perhaps also the ass as pack animals, the dog, the sheep, the fowl 
of Media, &c. 

Some peculiarities of art designs ; the single and the double flute ; 
the drum, in earthenware and leather, and the tambourine ; sort of 
reed organ and the bell ; &c., &c. 

388. They were acquainted also from Elam and Chaldea with the 
imperial system of government, the Four Regions, a title of Chief of 
the Four Mountains, the Susian duodenary division of states, the 
title of Pastor for their twelve leaders of these states, the appellatives 
of Middle Kingdom for their country, and of Black-headed people for 
their population ; a prime minister, state astronomers, and several 
other special officers ; change of name when ascending the throne ; 
the leader as first husbandman of the state ; 

Bestowing a cup (tsi'ok), as a distinction like that of the cup-bearer 
(rab-sag) ; the right side a place of honour ; titles of officers by 
birds' names ; the worship of a personal God, called Shang-ti^ several 
demigods and spirits ; an important social status for the chief wife 
and for the mother, and probably some peculiarities in the right 
of ownership ; 

The art of writing the Babylonian characters in columns, strokes 
thick and thin, semi-ideographic semi-phonetic, such as they were 
written between the times of Gudea and Khammurabi ; systems of 
syllabaries, phonetic and ideographic ; and most probably some written 
texts ; the custom of writing inscriptions inside of vases, across statues, 
&c. ; a few traditions and legends concerning Sargon=Shennung, 
some ancient kings and systematic periods of history, a Babylonian 
cosmogony, and other legends, &c. 

889. As previously stated, the ancient existence in China, after the 
arrival of Hwang-tiand his followers, of these 160 items of civilisation 
traceable to antecedents in Western Asia, is vouchsafed by statements 
in the history, traditions, and legends. Some of them are still in 
existence, others have disappeared in course of time, either by neglect 
or by better substitutions. But we know that (subject to further 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 381 

research and revision, which may invalidate a few of them, and make 
some additions), they formed with subsequent introductions from the 
outside, and the natural evolution and progress of the Chinese 
themselves, the basis of their civilisation. 

111. — Chronological List of Western Relations tvith China and their 
Importations from 2300 B.C. to 220 A.D. 

§ 390.— /'row Hwang-ti to the Hu dynasty, c. 2282-1954 B.C. 

c. 2282 B.C. 
Arrival of Hwang-ti from the west in the fiftieth year of his reign, 
first leader of the civilised Bak Sings, on the Banks of the Loh, where 
he sacrificed. List of civilisation (sections 383-388). 

c. 2260 B.C. 
Pitchers of agate were brought to Shao-Hao from Tan-kin (Turfan). 

c. 2225 B.C. 
Intercourse with Turfan during the first years of Tchuan-Hiiih. "* 

c. 2147 B.C. 
A Tartar named Tungli ( = Tengri, heaven), was astronomer of Ti 
Kuh Kao-sin. 

c. 2076 B.C. 
Intercourse with West Karashar (country of the Western Wang-mu). 
Some fir-balsam was procured from there by Hou-y, who made the 
journey. 

t-. 2061 B.C. 
In Yao's 16th year arrival from Kin-sn (later /^'o-X:(7?/=:Wa-khan). 

c. 1996 B.C. 
Intercourse with West Karashar. The West Wang-mu sent jade 
rings and archers' thimbles to Shun. Wan-ming, the great Yii 
is said to have gone there in his youth. 

§ 391.— /'row the Hia to the Tciiou, c. 1954-1110 B.C. 

c. 1954 B.C. 
Reign of the Great Yii. Issue of the Brief Calendar of Hia (on 
fourteen astronomical statements, ten which can be verified have 
been found exact for the twentieth century). 

c. 1950 B.C. 
Introduction of yoked or car horses by Hitchung and Kikwang. 



382 ORIGIN OF THE EAKLY 

c. 1904 B.C. 
On the Izth of May, 1904, solar eclipse at Tchin-sin (astronomically 
verified by G. Schlegel and F. Kuhnert). 

c. 1903 B.C. 
Arrival by the Kukunor, of the Kun-wus, clever craftsmen, ac- 
quainted with metallurgy (selection of ores), pottery, and roof tiling, 

astronomy, &c. 

c. 1803 B.C. 

First prison made in China. A western notion. 

c. 1775 B.C. 
Arrangement made with foreigners, east and west. 

c. 1741 B.C. 
Fresh arrival of Kun-wus who settled in Wei (north-east Honan). 
Kitan their chief introduced the art of bronze (= tung, i.e. mixed 
metal), probably alum, &c. 

c. 1734 B.C. 
Kung-kia in his third year became acquainted with iron { — tieh, i.e., 
barbarian metal,) from the natives Unsuccessful trial of iron swords. 

c. 1800-1700 B.C. 
According to the Yu knng, relations existed with the country of 
Kiu-su (=Aksu river, later called /^'o-//rt// = Wakan) from where car- 
pets were imported. Jade (from Khotan-Yarkand) was also a staple 
article of importation by the north-west. 

6. 1712 B.C. 
Arrival of Ki-tchung tribes from beyond the Flowing Sands, 
reckoned among the ancestors of the Tchou because of their settle- 
ment in south-west Kansuh, and introduction of hemp. 

c. 1690 B.C. 
Arrival of Lao shih shing, from or by Karashar, at the court of 
Kieh Kuei, last ruler of the Hia dynasty. 

§ 392.-77?^ Shang Yn Dynasty, 1686-1111 B.C. 

c. 1686 B.C. 

Foundation of the Shang, i.e. Merchants' Dynasty, of Shang-kiu, 

or Merchants' Hill (Kwei-teh fu, Honan). Intercourse with the west 

continued. 

c. 1558 B.C. 

Mokan (=Wu-Hien), a foreigner who had come from Karashar, 

officer of Shang Tai Mou, made the first catalogue of stars, arranged 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 883 

prayers to the hills and rivers, and introduced the use of the divinatory 
plant shi (ptarmica sibirica). 

c. 1538 B.C. 
In Tai Mou's twenty-sixth year arrivals from a western state near 
Karashar. Wang-Meng was sent there with presents, and also to the 
West Wang-mus to get some of their famous balsam. 

c. 1394 B.C. 
Shang Yang-kiah made an unsuccessful expedition as far as Turfan. 

c. 1331 B.C. 
Under Yn Wu-ting, arrivals of missions from six foreign states, using 
several interpreters. Some from the west were probably among them. 
Introduction of the yeast. 

c. 1325 B.C. 
Immigration of the Tchou at K'i, in south-west Shensi. They 
appear to have been red-haired Kirghizes aryanised to a certain extent. 

c. 1255 B.G. 
Tsu Kia of the Yn dynasty, in his twelfth year, made an expedition 
outside the western frontiers. 

c. 1190 B.C. 
Horses (of Khorasan) are said to have been brought to the chief of 
the Tchou, Wen Wang ; they had red manes, white bodies, and eyes 
like gold. 

c. 1170 B.C. 
Arrivals from the west to the seat of the Tchou. 

c. 1136 B.C. 
Lunar eclipse of January the 29th, twenty-six years before the 
foundation of the Tchou dynasty (astronomically verified by S. M. 
Russell). 

c. 1130 B.C. 
Importation of Jade from Turkestan, and probably of the game of 
draughts. 

§ 893.-77/^ West Tchou Dynasty, 1110-770 B.C. 

c. 1110 B.C. 

Overthrow of the Shang- yn dynasty and conquest of the country by 

the Tchou, with the help of native tribes. They introduced with 

them ring-money, clepsydra, polarity of magnet, names of stars, the 

twenty- eight lunar mansions, duodenary cycle of animals, worship of 



384 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

heaven and earth, notion of the Yn and Yang (perhaps still crude), 
use of the flagrant tch'amj " bringing down the spirits," 
dog sacrifice, dyeing red the manes of horses ; eunuchs and slavery, 
castration as a punishment ; three-holed flute, and other things, all 
notions most originary from Bactria and Khorasmia. 

6. 1105 B.C. 
TcHOu Wu Wang opens routes for intercommunications with all the 
foreigners. Importation of mastiffs from West Tibet. 

c. 1099 B.C. 
Arrivals from the west ; presentation of clever embroiderer women 
from Yen-ki (Karashar), of peacocks from Kti-tze (Kutcha), asbestos 
cloth from Badakshan. 

c. 1097 B.C. 
Arrivals of missions from the south-west : Shou-rni with Indian 
monkeys ; Nclc with calendars and astronomy ; Yiich shang with 
elephants and pheasants. 

1092 B.C. 
Arrivals from Kashgar with moral laws. 

1079 B.C. 
Several arrivals from distant countries. 

1017 B.C. 
In the twenty-fourth year of Tchou Tchao Wang, arrivals from the 
south-west by Tu and Sni. 

c. 990 B.C. 
Some tribes from the west brought to Muh-wang some asbestos 
from Badakshan. 

c. 986 B.C. 
Journey of Tchou Muh Wang, to Turfan, Karashar, the Yulduz 
plateau and further west, perhaps as far as Kashgar. He brought 
back with him several clever artificers, the arts of inlaying metal and 
of making paste-gems, &c., some jade from Khotan-Yarkand, amber 
through Wakhan, &c., Marionnettes, and other things. 

c. 984 B.C. 
A prince of the Si Wang-mus came to visit Muh Wang, and brings 
some white jade objects. 

c. 881 B.C. 
First settlement of Semi-Chinese of Ts'u on the south of the Yang- 
tze Ki^ng. 



CHINESE OIVILIBATION. 385 

860 B.C. 
The usual route by the north-west being stopped by unruly tribes 
since the days of Muh Wang, the jade traffic, on a smaller scale, was 
carried by a route more south, reaching China by the north-east 
corner of Tibet, the present Sung-pan ting route. 

c. 800 B.C. 
Foundation of Tagaung in Burma by Hindu colonists arrived 
through the land route. 

§ 394.-77/^ Eastern Tchou Dynasty, 770-481. B.C. 

770-678, &c., B.C. 
Practices of burying alive at funerals were then introduced by the 
Western Tartars in the State Ts'in (Shensi and Kansuh) as well as 
several barbarian sorts of worship. 

About 680-642 ^.C. 
Within twenty years of the introduction by Sennakherib of the 
Phoenician navy in the Persian Gulf, traders from the Indian Ocean 
(Erythroean Sea) arrived in the Gulf of Kiao-tchou (South Shantung), 
where perhaps their ships were first carried by chance of sea voyage 
like the one carrying Fa-hian to Canton, who arrived at the same spot 
in 400 A.D.) They established there colonies named Lang-ya 
(Lanka ?) and Tsih-moh (Saphar ?), and issued soon afterwards in the 
latter place the first inscribed coinage of China. The joint-issues of 
coins show that these marts, for two centuries, established trade rela- 
tions with cities in N. W. Shantung, S. C. Shansi, E. and S. E. 
Shensi, and C. Honan, and therefore that alone would suggest that the 
influence of these foreign merchants must have been extensive. 

They came on ships having birds' or animals' figure with two big 
eyes on the bow, and' two sculls at the stern, which have remained in 
the Chinese navy of later times. They introduced into the country 
besides the coinage standards of weight and measure (mina of Kark- 
hemish and Babylonian empan) ; quince fruits of Media ; notions of 
Sorcery and astrology, mythological imaginery, the twelve tze, or 
zodiacal signs (adapted from corrupted Babylon names of the months), 
for astrological purposes, and the lii-year cycle, from Assyria; the 
Phoenician custom of putting in tombs figures of horses and 
carriages in earthenware, and other things. 



886 OBIGIN OF THE EARLT 

641-600 B.C. 

During the following years, the items and notions introduced by the 
foreign sea-traders coming to Shantung were different from those of 
the first forty years, and came evidently from the border lands of 
India and Persia. In 631 their leader had a Sanskrit name, Gotra. 
Herewith a summary list : human sacrifices near river ; exposure of 
victims for droughts ; cold food at vernal equinox, and exchange of 
painted eggs ; tempering iron ; worship of the fire god of the earth ; 
sesamum (under its Indo-Persian name) ; mercury ; etc. 

626 B.C. 

You-yu, a barbarian of the west, became adviser of Muh Kung of 
Ts'iN. 

600-575 B.C. 

Opening of relations between India and the Non-Chinese west of 
Szetchuen. Arrival and settlement in the caves near the Min river of 
Brahmanist colonists, long-eared, eating Soma, and living like 
Anachorets. Arrival in 591, in T'su, through the same route of 
travellers from the south (India). Introduction there of the use of 
stamped ingots of useless shape for currency, horse-shoe shape of tombs 
and Wei-kan pillars (both symbolising the natural worship ; the 
shaduff ; and other things. 

571 B.C. 

Arrival in Tchou of travellers from Kiil-sii (:=Wakhan) who pre- 
sented camels with rich saddles. 

.565-525 B.C. 
A further change occurred then with the Erythroean Sea traders 
frequenting Shantung. They introduced fire worship, dualist worship 
and the five Avestic fires ; some superstitious practices such as the 
figure of a four yellow-eyed animal dispeller of spirits at funerals ; 
writing on skins ; and other things. This was due to the fact that 
Persian influence became paramount at that time. Cyrus conquered 
Babylon in 539. 

§ ^95.— Period of the Qontendmg States, 481-221 B.C. 

500-450 B.C. 
The influence exercised in China by the Erythroean traders 
became again Babylonian with a strong Indian tinge in some cases, 
and its activity was rather important. The Persians had obviously 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 387 

given a new life to the outside relations of the old Babylonians. The 
following- items were then introduced into Shantung and neighbouring 
provinces : Astronomical and mathematical notions {Tchou pt), count- 
ing rods, cementation of metal {c. 500), a sort of catapult {c. 475), 
concave metallic mirrors {c. 450), the Semitic names of the twelve 
Babylonian months, ten other names of the same nature, ten Ki as 
historical periods, mythical chronology of Babylon, thirty-three kings 
heavenly, terrestial, and human ; fabulous notions of fishmen carriers 
of civilisation, tree-of-life and calendar tree, hippocentaurs, semi- 
animal beings ; Egyptian phylacteria ; and other things. 

475 B.C. 
T'u-yii, a prince of Indian origin, founder of the Kingdom of Shuh, 
was then ruling at Tcheng-tu, in Szetchuen. 

473 B.C. 
Foundation by the King of Yueh of ao emporium at Kwet'-kz, near 
the Hang-tchou bay, which the Erythroean traders began to frequent. 
In 472 their ships carried soldiers of Yueh to Lang-ya. 

c. 470 B.C. 

Foundation of a second Hindu colony in Burma, said to have been 
made by a band of Kshatriyas from Gangetic India, on the east bank 
of the Irawaddy. 

c. 4,50 B.C. 

Foundation of a colony in Ukkalamandala, near Rangoon, by 
Taphussa and Bhallika, two Hindu merchants, not Buddhists, from 
Orissa. 

425-375 B.C. 

The trade from the Erythroean Sea to the eastern coasts of China 
(Shantung, Tcheh-kiang) was then entirely changed. It seems to 
have passed chiefly into the hands of Indian mariners who did not, as 
their predecessors, navigate through the Malacca Straits, and came by 
the south of Sumatra and Java. They imported mother-of-pearl of 
the Indian Ocean, large pearls of the Persian Gulf, yakut stones 
of Badakshan ; narcotics such as aconitum ; the mic-nao or 
sistrum ; fabulous accounts of the storm bird, avatar of Kurma (tor- 
toise), the Sumeru, Rishis and their drug of immortality {soma), 
Indian cosmogony; worship of the eight Hindu Vasiis ; fabulous 
accounts of five islands of the blessed and their reduction to three, as 



388 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

stations of their sea voyage ; process of casting coins, &c., in clusters ; 
mercury ; and other things. 

c. 390 B.C. 

Since the middle of the previous century the Kings of Ts'in (Shensi) 

were extending their sway westwards. About 390 B.C., the Ts'inites 

were going west in Outer Kansuh as far as Kwa-tchou (present An-si), 

to communicate with western traders, without any help of their 

government. 

634 B.C. 

Importation of jade from Yunnan-Burma into Hupeh through the 
south-western route. 

330 B.C. 

Foundation in Yunnan by an army from Ts'u of the Kingdom of 
TsEN, whose name in later times became for the southern traders, 
that of China. 

c. 327 B.C. 

Foundation of Mou (= exchange) as an emporium for foreign trade, 
near the present Ningpo. 

325-310 B.C. 

Tung-yeh, present Fuhtchou, of Fuhkien, became then an emporium 
for foreign sea-trade, and the imports there, at Moti^ and at Kwei-ki^ 
consisted of rhinoceros horns, ivory, carved vases, lamps with asbestos 
wicks, yakut rubies, western rope, peacocks, ear-haired rhinoceros, 
sugar of palm ; perfect dancers ; notion of a three-legged bird in the 
sun ; the chess-game ; &c. Transhipments were made from there to 
the ports in the north. 

305 B.C. 

Arrival of the Hindu Sila at Yen (Tchihli) from Magadha, by 
Tung-yeh (probably) or by the south-west route, after five years 
journey. He brought with him some magnifying glasses. (?) The 
inhabitants of Magadha he described as the Hindu statues of gods. 

311 B.C. 

Relations were then existing between Karashar-Kutcha (=5/ Wang- 
nm) and the Kingdom of Yen = Tchihli, by the north route. Importa- 
tion there of chrysolites of Kutcha. 

c. 280 B.C. 
Military expedition of the King of Tsen (Yunnan) towards Old 
Pagan on the Irrawaddy, in Burma, which facilitated commercial 



CHINESE OIVIIilSATlON. 389 

intercourse with the Hindu merchants of Pegu. Arrival afterwards in 
south-west Hunan of bearded merchants with valuable spices, niyai- 
nap, or mint palm, and mi-siuig, a narcotic from the western ocean. 

237 B.C. . 

Jade from Turkestan was then imported in the north-west. The 
fame of Alexander-the-Great and his deeds had reached the state of 
Ts'iN, then rising to the empire. 

§. 31)6. — The Chinese Empire. 
221 B.C. 
Foundation of the Chinese Empire by She Hwang-ti who seems to 
have endeavoured to imitate Alexander-the-Great in several respects. 

220 B.C. 

Arrival at Lin-tao, on the borders of Kansuh south-west, and Tibet, 
through Szetchuen, of Hindus, or western men, professing Hinduic 
views. They introdiiced the use of pyrites. 

220-217 B.C. 

First arrivals of Buddhist missionaries, Tzekao, Tcheng Pehkiao, 
Tsili Fang, &c., who were unsuccessful in their religious propaganda. 

201 B.C. 

The Erythrrean Sea traders had given up Kwei-ki as an emporium 
because it had fallen into the hands of the Chinese, and had made for 
a time Timg-yeh, which was still independent, their chief station. 
They imported there big pearls from the Persian Gulf (transhipped 
to Kwei-ki, which was a market for them), and for the first time some 
sugar-of-cane from India. Wu-tchu, the King of Mia- Yuch, could 
send as a present to the Chinese Emperor, Han Kao-tsu two fink 
measures of the foreign dainty. 

195 B.C. 

The same sea-traders in view of commerce with the new Semi- 
Chinese Empire of Nan-Yueh (204-111 B.C.) frequented then Hnppti, 
or Estuary of Meeting (near the present Pakhoi, south-west Kwang- 
tung), in connection with the market place of Heng-shan inland. 
They had imported there jasmine from Persia, and sambac from south 
India, peacocks, &c. They becaAie known as Hwang-tchi, or yellow 
fingers, from their habit of dying their fingers with henna, and their 
home was Rormnzia, near the Persian Gulf. 



390 ORIGIN OF THE EAKLY 

179-150 B.C. 

The Hormuzian sea-traders shifted again their landing place, on the 
conquest in 179 by the Nan-Yueh Emperor of the country westward, 
including Tung-king. They selected a convenient spot (near present 
Ha-tinh, south of Nghe-an province), on the outskirts of his dominion, 
where the colony of Kattigara was founded. They established also 
pearl fisheries at Tchn-yat, or coast of pearls, in the Isle of Hainan. 

164 B.C. 

The jade traffic of Turkestan was then continuing as shown by a 
jade cup procured in that year by the Chinese Emperor Han Wen. 

145 B.C. 
Greek ideas and notions penetrated then into China by the west 
trade route inland, such as Alchemy with the use of orpiment and 
cinnabar for transmutation into gold, &c. 

140 B.C. 
First arrival in South China, probably at Hoppu, of Tats'in= 
Tarshish merchants, with a large quantity of red corals from the 
Mediterranean, via Reckem, Ailana, and the Red Sea. Tchao-t'o, 
the Emperor of Nan-yueh, sent 462 branches to the Chinese Emperor 
Han Wu, who ornamented with them the Tsih-tsao pond of the 
Shang-lin park of the capital Tchang-'an, inaugurated in 188 B.C. 
The sea route was then passing south of Sumatra-Java and the Sunda 
Islands near Timor ; serpentine asbestos found in the latter was 
the occasion of several fables. 

139 B.C. 
Sea-going ships were then built for the first time in China, in 
imitation of those of the Erythroeans, by the Semi-Chinese State of 

Min-yueh (Fuh Kien). 

139-126 B.C. 
First mission of the Chinese government to the West for political 
motives. Tchang-kien, the envoy, went as far as the Oxus and Baktria, 
where he saw goods from Szetchuen imported there through India. 

133 B.C. 
Importation by the west trade route inland of brimstone from 
Tsiii-mi (800 li of Karakhodjo), alum shale from Kutcha, and a large 
metallic mirror which required rubbing with felt and powder of black 
tin to be kept shiny (of Greek make), and jade. 

130 B.C. 
In Shuh- Szetchuen importation from Burma of cocoa nuts and 
bananas. 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 391 

127 B.C. 

Importation in Nan-yueh of the henna plant from India, and of 
Nard from north-west Sumatra, by Tats'in=Tarshish merchants. 

126 B.C. 

On the return of Tchang-kien, the Chinese Emperor Han Wu 
adopted his report proposing a conquest of Bactria by way of India. 
Some ten missions were sent during the following years to find the 
routes, but they were stopped in Yunnan and in south-west Szetchuen. 

126-122 B.C. 

Introduction by the west route inland of further Greek notions, such 
as astronomical speculations, circulation of the earth, the 76-year 
cycle, knowledge of stone-coal, burning lenses, &c. 

119-116 B.C. 

Second mission of Tchang-kien to the Wu-suns in Hi. He opened 

by himself and his assistants intercourse with some ten states of 

central Asia. After his return the state mint was reorganised like 

those of Athens and Rome. 

115 B.C. 

Alum-shale from Kutcha, amber objects from Kabulistan, ostrich 
eggs of Mesopotamia (probably decorated with pictures as was usual), 
and jugglers from Reken, sent by the Parthians, were then brought into 
China. A regular intercourse was then established between west 
Turkestan and China. 

Lucern, vine again, cucumber, and safiflower with their Greek 
names, walnut tree with its Aryan name, common bean, parsley, great 
garlic, hemp and sesamum again, pomegranate of Parthia, were then 
introduced into the Flowery Land and carefully transplanted at first 
in a park of the capital. 

113-108 B.C. 

Several missions were sent by the Chinese Emperor without success 

to the Greek State of Yuan=Yaon, Ferghana, with goods and presents, 

to get from the king some of his Nisaean horses (of classical fame) 

blood perspiring. 

Ill B.C. 

Conquest of the dominion of Nan-yneh by the Chinese. Unsuc- 
cessful transplantation in the Fnli gardens at Tchang-'an of native 
plants from the new provinces, and besides several already named, 
of some which had been introduced by the foreign trade, such as sweet 
flag of south India, Indian shot, Qtusqzialis Indica, &c. 



y 



Y* or ' 

UNIV- 



392 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

110 B.C. 

The Chinese conquest having included Kath'gara, which they called 
Nhitnam (Jihnan) the Hormuzian sea-traders removed once more 
their chief landing place ; they established it further south, on the 
west of Cape Cambodia, east side of the Gulf of Siam, in Tcham, the 
Zabai of Ptolemy. They came from there to Kattigara and Hoppu, 
bringing pearls of the Persian Gulf, coloured glass of Kabulistan, pre- 
cious stones and strange objects such as a big pearl, perfectly spherical, 
&c. The Chinese Emperor Han Wu being desirous of getting some more 
coloured glass was obliged to send a ship for that purpose to their 
Emporium. 

108 B.C. 

Merchants from Tats'in-Tarshish arrived at Hoppu with red corals 
for the market of Heng-shan, and with a hwa-ti-nin, or flower-hoofed 
bull, which they presented to court. They taught a process for dyeing 
black with the leaves of the mu-lan — magnolia. 

102-100 B.C. 

After several abortive attempts, frustrated by the Hiung-nus, a 
Chinese army reached and conquered the Greek State of Yitan^^X^on, 
Ferghana. A new king was enthroned, and ten Nis^ean horses were 
brought back in triumph. The results of this expedition were impor- 
tant, as they gave to the Chinese empire a prominent position which 
was acknowledged in western and eastern Turkestan. 

100 B.C. 

Trade with India by the Szetchuen route was active. Sugar of 
cane, aconitum, and saltpetre from India were then imported at Wii- 
tu (near present Kiai-tchou, south-west Kansuh). In 73 B.C. a small 
mirror in an amber case was imported from Kabulistan through India 
by the same route to Han Suan-ti. 

98-87 B.C. 
Trade continued uninterrupted with Turkestan, &c. Alum-shale, 
saltpetre, sulphate of copper, /nnng-dogs from the Kuen-lun are re- 
corded importations. In 87, the King of the Yueh-ti sent to the 
Chinese Emperor some precious spice of Socotra. Another sort of 
spice had been sent by him in 98 B.C. 

73 B.C. 

Ships from India and from Tats'in-Tarshish arrived at Kattigara, 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 898 

the Chinese port. Some twenty years later ships of Oman arrived 
with the founder of Cambodia at Zabai. Kalingas in Java, 75 B.C. 

59 B.C. 

Establishment of a General-Governorship of the Si-yii or Western 
Regions, at Wu-luy, near Karashar, by the Chinese, with jurisdiction 
over thirty-six states of east and west Turkestan. 

51 B.C, 
Si-kiun, a Chinese princess, who in 105 B.C. had been sent in 
marriage to the King of Wusuns in Hi, came back introducing into her 
native country \hsi p'i-pa or Persian tamhiirah. 

50 B.C. 

Chinese authority was powerful enough in central Asia to instate 
Hermaeus, a Greek prince, on the throne of Kabulistan. But this 
authority lasted only a few years there. 

20 B.C. 

Travellers from the country of Seres (a name meaning yellow and 

oriental, given to the Chinese by their western neighbours), after four 

years journey, reached Samos with an Indian embassy to the Roman 

Emperor Augustus, 

12 B.C. 

Some cotton paper, haktai, had been brought from India to Loh- 

yang. 

11 B.C. 

Arrival of travellers from the Wusuns (Hi), Kang km (Samarcand), 

and Pan-til — Parthia. 

2 B.C. 

Y-tsun-kou brought Buddhist books to China. At that time fifty 

states of the Si-yii were receiving investiture from China, and 376 

princes and officers there were holding Chinese seals of office. 

1-37 A.D. 
New instances of intercourse with the south. In A.D. 1 arrival of 
a mission from Yueh-shang (south Indo-China). In A.D. 2, Hwang- 
tchi, or Hormuzian, ships arrived at Kattigara and Hoppu. In 37, 
arrival of another mission firom Cochinchina. 

10-75 A.D. 
In 10-16 A.D. revolt of the states of the Si^yu (with the exception 
of Yarkand until 41 A.D.) against the Chinese government. Inter- 
ruption of regular intercourse for 65 years. 



394 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

41 A.D. 

Rachias envoy of Ceylon to Rome, said that his father used to trade 
beyond the Himalayas with the red-haired Seres. Since 108 B.C. 
the red-haired Kunmings were subjects of the Chinese in south-west 
Szetchuen, where the trade route was passing. 

47-85 A.D. 
First practical use of the monsoons in 47 A.D. by Hippalus, of 
Alexandria, who sailed direct from the Red Sea to Muziris on the 
Indian coast. The Periplus, about 85 A.D., shows that the Greek 
merchantmen did not go beyond Nelkynda of south India. 

67 A.D. 

Return of a Chinese mission sent to India. Official introduction of 
Buddhism into China. Adoption of seven musical notes as in India. 

69 A.D. 

The 'Ai-Lao advancing north-west, cut the route through the Kun- 
mings, and submit to China. Foundation amidst them of the great 
mart of Yunri-tchan;/ (present Tali fu) for foreign trade. The imports 
then consisted of copper, iron, lead, tin, gold, silver, bright pearls, 
amber, crystal, vitreous ware, kassia-grubs, oyster pearls, peacocks, 
kingfishers, rhinoceroses, elephants, apes, and tapirs ; all products 
from Shan-Burma, Malacca, Ceylon, India, Kabulistan, but nothing 
from the Red Sea. 

c. 72 A.D. 
' Arrival of the first Jewish colony in south-west China. 

84-89 A.D. 
Mission from Cambodia arrived in 84 to the Chinese court. In 89 
Hindu traders arrived at Kattigara and Hoppu. 

87-106 A.D. • 
From 73 to 98, the Chinese gradually re-established their authority 
and prestige in central Asia. The General Pan-tchao in 97 went as 
far as Antiochia Margiana, and sent Kan-yng who travelled as far as 
the Persian Gulf. In 87 a Parthian mission arrived with lions, 
ftt-pao, 700 pieces of cloth of various colours, and some m-hoh perfume 
(Storax made in Syria), sent by the Yueh-ti King. In 101 another 
Parthian mission, sent by Pacorus II., brought lions and ostrich eggs. 
In 106 a last mission from Parthia arrived. All the Si-yii revolted 
then against the Chinese. The preceding years were those when the 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 395 

agents of Maes Titianus were trading with China probably through 
the Parthian Missions. 

97-131 A.D. 

Missions from the Shan States in 97, 120, 124. The second mission 
presented jugglers from Tats'in, with which country relations had 
began by the south-west. The Greek Alexander from whom were 
derived the information in Marinus of Tyre had then travelled on 
board ship as far as Pegu. 

119-150 A.D. 

Attempts at re-opening communications with the Si^u and recon- 
quest as far as Karashar in 126. In 134 a mission came from 
Kashgar. In 147, 148 Buddhist missionaries arrived from Parthia. 

159 A.D. 

Hindu merchantmen arrived at Canton via Kattigara. The King 
of Saurashtra Mandala (Guzerat) was then sending ships to Mahacina, 
Cina, and Bhota. First importation gf cloves (chicken tongues) of 
the Moluccas in China. For two hundred years afterwards the 
landing place of the Indian and Omanite ships was chiefly Funam- 
Cambodia, from where the goods were transhipped for the Chinese 
ports. 

166 A.D. 

Arrival of Roijian merchants, of whom An-tun (Marcus Aurelius 
Antoninus) was the Emperor, at Kattigara and Canton to open inter- 
course. "^^'^ Parthian war had interrupted the communication inland 
which, however, was restored in the years 172-187 as shown by fresh 
arrivals of Buddhist missionaries from Parthia and Samarkand. 
Later arrivals of Roman traders were reported at Canton in 226, 
284, &c. 

^ -t» 'T ^ 

397. The relations of the west with China since the second century 
which became more frequent, are beyond the scope of the present work. 
We have had occasion to mention a few of them in the course of our 
enquiries and they may be referred to in the alphabetical index. 

398. Arrived at the end of these laborious pages, we think it 
necessary to mention once more an important principle in all com- 
parisons of civilisations. It is that borrowings of elements of culture, 
except in material cases, having required necessarily a certain amount 
of mental activity from the borrowers, cannot be blind copies and 



396 ORIGIN OF THE EARLY 

servile imitations, specially when carried to distant lands and different 
suTroundings, and not kept up by a continued intercourse with the 
mother country. We have not included as borrowings many strong 
suggestions whose western character was often quite clear, which 
would have lengthened sensibly several of the lists we have established, 
and we have counted only as units such comprehensive elements of 
civilisation as writing and astronomy. 

. 399. The conclusion of the present work is that some 370 items. 

I of civilisation have been introduced in China from Anterior Asia and 

/also W. India during the twenty-five centuries covered by the investi- 

/ gations it contains or summarizes. About 22(S2 B.C. some 175 of 

/ these were imported by the Bak Sings themselves, including more 

'- than 160 derived from the GhdddeQ-FJ/fmiui 'd'^ii^^hauon, such as it was 

at that time neither before nor afterwards. During the Hia and 

Shang dynasties only twenty-five appear to have been introduced from 

western and central Asi-i. The Tchou themselves introduced about 

twenty-five, mostly Baktrian and Khorasmian. The traders of the 

Erythroean Sea, who began to arrive on the Chinese coasts in the 

seventh century, introduced sixty-six items, of Assyrian 12, Indo- 

Persian 7, Mazdtean 4, Indo-Assyrian 14, Indian IG, and 

mixed 13, sources successively, and in homogeneous groups, while 6 

came direct inland from India, all before the Empire. During the 

four centuries of the Ts'in and Han dynasties about '^'^ '" .15! wb;k 

introduced, viz. : 10 Greek, 54 from Parthia, 22 from India and 

Burma, and 16 by the traders of the Indian Ocean. All these elements 

of western culture, with a limited contribution of the Pre-Chinese, 

form with the own adaptation, progress, and evolution of China, the 

real bases o f the Chinese civilisation. 

§ 400. — Comparative Chronology. 
Egypt 5.^00 B.C. Chaldea 4,")00 B.C. China 2300. Egnean, 
MikfBnian, Pseudo-Hittite, Assyrian, 2000 B.C. 



China. 


Rectified. 


Bamboo Annals. 


Common 


Hwang-ti 


r. 2332-2232 


2388 


2698 


Shao-Hao 


c. 2282-2213 


(not) 


2598 


Tchwan-hiuh 


c. 2226 


2288 


2514 


Ti-Kuh 


c. 2147 


2208 


2436 


Ti-Tchih 


9f 


j> 


2366 



CHINESE CIVILISATION. 



397 



China. 




Rectified. 


Bamboo Annals. 


Common. 


TiYao 


( 


:;. 2085-2076 


2146 


2357 


Ti Shun 




2004 


2043 


2255 


HiA Dynasty 




1954-1687 


191)0-1594 


2205-1767 


Solar eclipse 




1904 


1948 


2155 


Shang Dynasty 


p 


1686-1111 


1558-1051 


1766-1123 


Tai Mou 




1563 


1475 


1637 


Wu Ting 




1336 


1274 


1324 


(3rd year of Wu 


Wang) 1120 


1061 


1132 


TcHou dyn. Jst 


year 


1110 


1050 


1122 


Tcheng Wang 




1103 


1044 


1115 


Muh Wang 




1001 


962 


1001 


Li Wang, 12th 


year 


841 


841 


841 


W. Tchou dynasty 


770 


770 


^^ 770 ... 


Contending States 


461 


461 


^ 461 


Foundation of ] 


Empi: 


L-e 221 


221 


221 



r^ 



,>- 



.ee- 



LI 



OF THK 



3r^ 



^y 



UNIVERsiTl 



I 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



I 



ABBREVIATIONS. 

Ch. = China, Chinese. la\.=Islands. '^li.^=Moimtain. l:^a,t.— Natives. 

E.^Rirer. S.=See. S.Y.=^Sub rcrbo. St.=State. Ht.^Tribes. 

W. = Wawj or Kin;/. A star indicates a rectification. 



Abakansk 338 

Abhiraja 56, 59, 60, 117 

Abiria 100 

Abricot 47, 49. 198,374 

Abyss, female 127 

Acclimatation, 230, 216, 391 

Agokarama 57 

Aconitum 236, 365, 387, 392 

Aerology 186 

Addumu 103 

Advance, S.W. 219, 250 

Aeng pass 251 

Aepyornis 170 

Agate 267 ; pitchers of, 328 
333, 381 

Agathou daimonos nesos 111 

Ag-daimon 113 

Aghic 272 

Agriculture 11, 379, s. Hus- 
bandry 

Aham metal 99 

Ahaziah 244 

Ahura mazda 95 

Ailana 390 



Ai-Lao 41, 252, 



394 



Ak-Bozat 289 
Akhaemenians 157 
Akhaz 278 
Akkadian 293 ; and Ch. 



342 



Alexander the great, 38, 158, 

203,-5,-6,-14,-43, 389 ; wall 

of 209 
Alexandria 268, 271 
Alligators 208, 329 > 
Allophylians 317 
Allusions, valuable 316 
Aloes paper 245,-6 
Altars, square, 11, 379 
Altering texts 140, 143 
Altin kazuk 289 
Alum, 230,-2, 382, 390,-1,-2 
A-man 58 
Amber, 39, 41, 230, 231, *232 

369,-7, 314, objects 391, 

case 392, 394 
Amesha gpentas 81, 83 
Anachorets 196, 200, 386 
Anaximander 278 
Ancestral worship 74, 79, 

139, 160, 162, 377 
Ancient documents, 127, 141, 

143,-7-8, 151-2, 175, 288 
Andamon isl. Ill 
Angular Bow 194 
^Animal : cycle 356, 383 ; 
O-^^eftinics (UQ) 323 ; mother 

126, 361 ; quadrants 298, 

358 



11, 29; words 10, 13, pass. 
Aksu, Oxus 371 
Akurgal 307 
Alaka-Khotan 74 
A-lan-na 311 
A-la shan 327 
Aleutian 344 
Alias strait, 111, 181 
Alchemy, Greek. 214.217,390 
Alchemists 214 
Alectromancy 218 
Alexander 240. 244. 395 



numerals 340; orientation- Animals, domesticated 380; 



pack-312 

Anku-Angha 58 
Annam, coast 68, 240 ; his- 
tory 44, 45, s. Tung king 
Annius Plocamus 251 
Anro-Mainyus 95 
An-shi-Kao 248 
An-shih-lu 230 
Ansih-Andhra 58 
Ansik 224, s. Parthia 
Antimony 85 
Antiochia Margiana 222, 394 



Antun^ Antoninus 245, 395 

Anu and Anah 10 

An yang 156 

An yang wang 236 

Anzan 378, 26 

Apaosha 350 

Apes 99, 252, 394 

Apocalypse's Animals 358 

Apsu 127 

Arabian sea 89,96, 102 ; tra- 
ders HI, 211 ; in India 
97, 107; Bengal* 119; 277 

Araktu 109 

Archaian white races 80 

Archaic Ch. 17 s. Ku-wen 

Archeology, Ch. impeded 
368 

Archer's thimble 195, 264. 
379, m\ 

Archery 176 

Archiver of Tchou 127 

Arcus 194 

Areca catechu 246 252 

Arghamak 224 

Argyre 251 

Aris'tolochia 252 [379 

Arithmetical notation 13, 

Arkan-jolduz 289 

Armillary sphere 289, 371 

Armlet-mana 97, 101 ; in 
India 101 

Aromata of Socotra 230, 231 ; 
coast 96 

Arrakan 102 

Arrows 179, 195, 374 

Arsaces 214, 222, s. Parthia 

Art designs 380 ; B. & Ch. 
72; 391 

Artificers, clever, 382, 384 

Aryan Influence 30, 73 ; 
„ Words 31 

Asafcetida 265, 270 



400 



ALPHABETICAL INDKX. 



Asbestos 35, 77. 182, 187, 
309, 318; a bark 188; 
cloth 384 ; hair 188 ; jokes 
187 ; legends 259 ; wicks 
180, 388 ; in Ch. 187, 188, 
Sunda Islands 188, *366, 
390 
Ass 343, 380 ; and Horse 343 
Assurbanipal 101 
Assyria and India 97 
Assyro-Babylcnia 30, 71, 73; 
Art in Siberia 14 ; Bronzes 
88;, Words 13 
Astrognosie 294-8-9 
Astrological Books 206 
Astrology 89-92, 385 
^Astr^noiny 8, 74, 70,(77/#0) 
82, 93, 297, 383-4r387; 
Unscientific 294-5 ; Eor- 
— ejgn 179, 287, 295, 382 ; 
Greek 217, 282, 391 ; In- 
struments of 10, *338, 368 
379 ; Native 286, 294, 374 
Public Officers 20, 380 
South 108, 158, lo9, 190, 
_ 290, 296-7 ; Tartar ^9 ; 
Towers for 379, 343711 ; 
Verifications of 6. 8, 39, 
88, 179,'- 277, 297, 381; 
Work on 287-8, 290 ; Ob- 
servations 341 
Augustus 393 
Autocracy 203 
Avatars 173, 387 
Avestic infl. 82, 173, 157, 364 

387 ; five fires 1 64, 166 
Azure Dragon 358 

Baa-n-pe 283 
Baba kul 273 
- Babylon 102, 157, 230 ; civ. 
. in Ch. 70 ; and India 96, 

97, 101 ; Cosmogony 127, 

t 175 ; Fire-drill 168 ; Fire- 

/ mirrors 168 ; Imagery 91 ; 

I Months, 1 2 Signs 94, *338, 

\ Names 358 ; Navy 102, 

105 ; Sea-trade 91 ; Ships 

105; Zodiac 90, 341; India, 

influences, 386 
Bab-salimeti 103, 105 
- B^Ctxia 82, 315, 321; Chin. 

Coins 226, 309 ; Conquest 

projected 250-1 , 254, 391 ; 

India-China 50 ; to Jade 

Mines 321 
Bactro-Pali 198 
Badakshan 73, 77, 80, 180, 

377, 384; Route 75, 225, 

308 
Bagaratch kul 267 
Bagdad 26 



Bagistan 26, 305 

Bagla 262 

Bahrein isl. 96, 103 

Bahr Yukhre 169 

Bak, etym., 303, compounds, 

307 : ethnic 22, 26, 302 
Bak-Feng 304 
Bakh, Baku 305 
Bakhdi 26, 305, 307 
Bakhtan 26 

Bakhthyari 26, 305, 317, 350 
Bak kwan 304 
Bak Li 304 
Bak mes nagi 26 
BaJiS, Bak Sings, 14, 20, 27, 
104, 141, 161, 195, 264, 
I 302-7, 310, 318, 372 ; Ad- 
vance 316; Beginn. 32n ■ 
Chiefs of 320, 305, 319. 
/ 336 ; Civilised 336, 377 ; 
! Date 341; Migration 71, 
288, 291. 321 ; Multiply 
332-3; Trade in Jade, :32, 
309 ; Physical Type 318. 
377 
Bak wang 304 
Balance Scales 378-9 
BaH 110. 113; Strait of. 

360 
Balsams. 99, 270. s. Fir 

balsam 
Baltic Amber 231 
Bamboo 104, 266 ; Bark 14 ; 
boats 114,* 360 ; Staves 
198, 200 ; Tubes 340 
Banana 246, 390 
Banca 108, 255 
Banda 259 
Bangka 108, 111 
Banners 204 
Bantam 108, 111 
Bantings 260 
Barbarous Customs 131-3, 

385 
Barbarikon 51, 53 
Barkul 314 
Barley 379 
Barter 251, 374 
Barugaza51 
Basiati 100 
Battle ships 115 
Bean, common, ^27, 391 
Bear. Great. n57-p — 
Bearded Mjrghants. 250. 

389; ■RaceslCo; s. Hu 
Bedstead 379 
Beginn. of day 79 ; of year 

79 
Behistun l."')7, 305 
Beidawy 35,* 351 . 
Bell 210b, 380: Hanging 
379 ; of Peking 167 



Bellows 379 

Belomancy 379 

Belos 341 

Benaketi 351 

Bengal, Bay of. 111,* 119 

Bennu 339 

Berosus 37, 96 

Bhiennaka. 56. 60 

Bhota 247. 395 

Bibliotecal Catastrophes 

345 
Bingani-Sariris 297 
Bintang 180, 186 
Birds, enormous 170; foot- 
prints 14, 318; fronting 
72 ; head-ships 385 ; offi- 
cers 353, 380 ; path 289 ; 
stations 271 
Bit-yakin 102 

Black hair, no., 85, 87, 318, 
377 
.(Black heads 20. 96. 97, 98, 
^ 380 

Black, obelisk 97, 182; people 

109 ; river 266-9 ; teeth 

38, 11.5, 360; warrior 358; 

water, 325-7 3 -^y 

Blessed, Isles of 387 ; S. 

Fairy isl. 
Block printing 345 
Blood, besmearing 342, 379 ; 
drank 313: perspiring 219,' 
224, ,891 
Bloodshed, wholesale 207 
Blue eyes 85, 318 
Boats, char. 15; inv. 114; 
179, 360; Chaldean 105; 
Indian 260 
Bogdo-Ola 269 
Bogh 305 
Bolor 308 
Bonze 2G7b 

Book of Hwang-ti 126, 127 
Boots, leather 176 
Borrowings, adapted 396 ; 

first 380 ; X, xi 
Botany, historical 230 
Boussole 31 ; s. Compass 
Bows, composite 194, 379 
native 360 ; plain 374 
star 298, 340 ; symbol 194 
various 194-5 
Bower, MS. 313 
Brahmans. ascets 108, 197, 
200. 210, 386; influence 
107, 118, 122, 123. 197 
Branches, twelve 341 
Bricks, building 11, 13, 379 ; 

stamped 342; vaults 379 
Brimstone 213, 215-6, 390 
Brine, boiling the 379 
Brinjal 269, 270 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



401 



Bronze 86, 88. 379, 382 ; art 

386 ; ingots 118 ; and iron 

357; statues '211, 214; 

weapons 214 
Broussonetia papyrifera 251 
Buddhagosha 1U4 
Buddhism, early 211; introd. 

210, 212, 389. 394 
Buddhists 249. 389. 394 ; 

books 209b, 21 lb. 393; 

first 207b, 389 ; images 

207b, 210b 
Bucket-wheels 361 
Buff coats 184, 366 
Bull ; Flower-hoofed, 392. 

242; Golden 364 
Bulunghir 266-9 
Buried Cities ;^09, 310 
Burma: 117; Amber 39, 41. 

*2;i2; Jadeite 40, 41, 388 ; 

Nagas 89 ; Sources, 56, 

117-8 ; to Szetchuen 64, 

65 ; Tsenites in 56, 388 
Burning : the Books 36-7, 

205-6 ; Lenses 219, 391 
Burying alive 132-3. 138. 210. 

&c., s. Siun 



Cakes. Sugar, 237 
Calendar 92. 288. 384 ; Ba- 
bylon reform 2:^0. 279. 281, 

288, :S41 ; Hia 6. 143, ;381 ; 

Hwang-ti 329, 331 ; Tchu- 

en Hiiih 81; Tree 24. *387; 

Tsih-Moh 364 ; Vedic 281- 

2 ; Yueh shang 46 
Canals 11, 379 
Canarium 246 
Canopy 379 
Canton 241, 245, 247, 248, 

395 
Capitals, s. Kung-shan, 

Kung-sang, Puh, Poh, 

Ping-yang 
Carchemish 36. s Karkem- 

ish 
Cardinal points shifted 11, 

288, 299, 321, 378 
Carmania 232 
Carpets 371 
Cassia 193, 194 ; grubs 234, 

238 394 
Casting: Coins 388; Metal 

379 
Castration 384 
Catapult 194. 387 
Catalogue of Lit. 151, 210; 

of Stars, s. v. 
Cauries 235. 374 ; Metallic 

118 
Cavalry 176 



Cave-dwellings. 196. 197. 

278, 374 
Celts, Shouldered 374 
Cementation 165, 167, 387 
Central Kingdom 151 
Ceylon 36, 37 ; to Ch. 107, 
251 ; Egypt 98 ; Rome 
251 
Chaldean : Astron. 302. 341; 

Boats 105 
Chaldeo-Elamite civil.in Ch. 

376-8 
Chance Sources 181-2 
Changes of Name 380 ; in 
Sea-trade 81, 156-8, 2:^9- 
241. 259. 387-392 
Chantabon 262 
Chaotic Creatures 171, 387 
Characters changed 140, 184 
Chariots 179, 379 
Charles the Fifth 1S7 
Chau : kung 1()3 ; ma 163 
Chersonese trade 260 
Chess 366, 388 
Chichiklik pass 309, 312 
Chicken tongues, s. cl»ves 
Chiefs early, 33() 
Ch'ih measure 340 
Childish ditties 92 
China's : name 39, 63. (>4. 
66. 67, 68, 193. 207 ; An- 
tiquity 142; Astronomy 
371 ; Boating 112, 115; 
calendar 339 ; chronology 
6 ; historians patriotic 
317; isolated 29; limbos 
71; linguistics 293, 342; 
literature intricate 298, 
wrecked 206 ; natives 1 14, 
373-4 ; navy 106, 2n0 ; 
outside relations 315. 381- 
39i> ; pearls 242 ; poor 
states 314, 335 ; religion 
135. 362, pass. ; writing 15. 
345 : to Ceylon 261 : Her- 
at 268. 311. Hira 2(;i, 
India 61. Pegu 56 
Chinese, character 147 ; in 
Kansuh 328. Shensi 328. 
Honan 333, Shantung 
333, Shansi 335; in Cen- 
tral Asia 221. 392. 394 ; v. 
Hiungnus 219, 220 
Chorasmians, s. Khoras- 

mians 
Choul, Shul, 369 
Chronology 6 ; rectified 88. 
143, 172. 192, 354, 381; 
table 397 
Chrysolite 365. 388 
Cina 248. 395 
Cinnabar 214, 367, 379, 390 



Cinnamon 191. 193. 194, 246 
Circulation. Earth. 368 ; ix 
Civilisation borrowed 71. 
378 ; native :{73-5 ; im- 
ported 3S1-396 ; how divi- 
ded 396 ; ix >^ . '' 
Claws of birds 14, 31^' 
Clay images 136. 138; 

vaults 377 
Clepsydra 10, 78, 281-2, 378, 
383 ; Egypt 279, 281 ; 
India 280 
Climate, warmer 360 
Clinkstones 374 
Cloth : coloured 369, 394 ; 
striped 201 ; woollen 200 
s. Asbestos 
Cloud-thunder orn 72 
Cloves 181, 252, 253. 257. 

259. 366. 395 
Cluster casting 1 79. 388 
Coal burning 272 ; stone 

368, 391 
Coasting navigation 201 
Cocoa-nuts 251, 390 
Coffins in earthenware 374, 

37() 
Coinage 89, 214, 385 ; shapes 

useful, useless 118 
Cold food 160, 386 
Collyrium 99 

Colours symbolical 10 ; 

horses 211 ; planets *338. 

358 ; of space 135, 208b, 

211 

Compass, mariners 31, 45, 

261, 283-5 
Complexion fair 377 
Composite Bow 194-5 
Concave mirrors 165, 387 
Conversation 168 
Cone fruit figure 72 
Conflict, schools 138, 147 
Confucius 74, 118. 119. 125, 
140-1, 180, 166 ; character 
139 ; editor 143. 363 ; 
historian 139 ; and Lao- 
tze 139, 142 
Confucianism 138. 142. 147 ; 

Books burnt 206, 209 
Conquests, projects of 203, 

207, 249, 253. 315. 391 
Contending states 70, 145, 

3S6 
Convex sky 10. 378 
Cook. First. 161 
Copper 85, 87. 252, 333, 374, 
379. 394 : and tin 85 ; 
vases 333 ; sulphate of 
369. 392 
Coptos 96. 98 [379 

Coracles 11. 114. 208b, 344. 



402 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



Corals ; Red 236, 243, 390, 

392 ; fishery 237 ; white 

109, *360 
Corea 114, 119, 302 
Cos, cloth of 200 
Cosmic egg 342 
— Cosmogony : female 126, 

20Sb ; male ali^ female 

127 ; Bab. 380; Ind. 387 

174 
Cosmography 288 
Counting rods 387 
Cow, mythical 126, 129 
Cowherd and Sp. D. 301, 

371, cf. 289 
Cross-bow 192, 194-5, 300 
Cross-legged 114 
Crow, Sun, 193 
Crystal 2,V2, 394, 247, 182 
Cubebs 180 
Cubit, half, 378 
Cucumber 220, 227, S91 
Cuneiform, 14, 318, 380; in 

C. Asia 312, 321, 322; 

latest 231 
Cup, bearer 380 ; bestowing 

380 
Cupmarks, cupules 328, 

374 
Cupid's bow 194 
Curios, trade, 179, 182, 204, 

246 
Cycles, 10 ; of ten 10, 379, 

twelve 379; 78, 93; 

nineteen 288 : sixty 379, 

10, 78 ; seventy-two 379 ; 

seventy-six 368, 391 
Cylinder seals 343 
Cyprus 102, 105, 187 
Cyrus 102, 157; and India 

198 



-c, Dahae, Daoi, 53, 354 
Dakshina 122 
Damaskeening 357 
Dams 11, 334, :541, 379 
Dancers 388 ; Girls 180 ; see 

Jugglers 
Darchiendo 50 
Darius 157 
Days by five, seven, ten 340, 

378 
Daza raja 56 
Dead on bush, piles, trees, 

374 
Decimal Notation, 101, 341, 

379 
Deluge 97, 100, 173, 324, 

349, 377 
Demavend 219 
Demi-gods 172, 280 



Democrites 217 
-^ Demon Classifier 323 
Denary Cycle 10, 339, 379 
Deneb 299 
Derivation of writing 345, 

14, 15, 17 
Dermata Serica 51 
Desarene 251 

Destruction of Relatives 132 
Difficulties of Journey 308- 

314 
Diglat 22 
Dintih-Babylon, 22, 23, 25, 

318 
Diodotus 214 

Disorder, General, 145, 146 
Distant regions 76 
Divination 10, 92, 377, 379 
Divine: prefix 2u, *346; Self- 
ruler 151 
Djemshid 35 •- ) 
Djurtchen 138, 198 
Documents suppressed 363 
Dogs : 380 ; Keepers 81 ; 

Mung 392; Mastiffs 47, 

48, 49, 197, 384 ; Sacrifice, 

79, 132, 384 ; Star 298, 348 
Domesticated Animals 11, 

176, 343, 380, 381, 386 
Double-banked boats 260 ; 

Crops 298 ; Eyed-ships 

106, 178, 385 ; hours, 9, 

339 
Draconis Pole Star, 289 ' 
Draco 302 
Dragon : Season 359 ; five 

175 
Draughts 367, 383 
Dravidian words 39, 100 
Drawings of statues 21ub 
Dress Emblems 11, 379, 344 
Driving Animals 343 
Drought ; Goddess of, 329, 

350 ; Superst. 90, 386 
Drums 204. 208, 329, 380 
Dry Sea, Hun hat, 314 
Dualist worship 90, 386 
Dulati 120 
Dumang 23, 318 
Dungi 5, 14, 15, 24, 26, 32, 

318. 372, 377. 378 
Duodenary Cycle 10, 340-1, 

378; Animals 356; Months 

358 
Dyavaprithivyau 81 
Dye of Magnolia 242, 244, 

392 



Ea 105 

Eagle wood 247 

Eannada 307, 324 



Ear ; Elongated 121, 124. 
361, 386 ; haired rh. 388. 

182 ; left cut off 342, 379 
Earth flat 341, 378 ; circula- 
tion 216, 368 

Earthen ; carriages 13ti, 137, 

385; coffins 374, 376; 

drums 380 
Earthquake 261 
East Barbar 134, 144 
Easter Eggs 386 
Ebony wood 247 
Eclipses. 39, 88, 297, 382. 

383 
Egg : cosmic 343 ; easter 

386 ; tombs 374 
Egypt 3, 15, 80, 97, 106, 157, 

183 ; Animal worship 171 : 
and Ceylon 168 ; and In- 
dia 99, 100, 169; influence 
36, 37, 76, 169, 352 ; jour- 
neys 359 ; phylacteria 169, 
170, 171. 387 

Eight : Hindu Vasus 156, 
171-2, 387 : hundred years 
of Hien-yuen 327 : wands 
10, 340, 379 

Eighteen small states 210 

Eizion-gaber 102, 243 

Elam, Nam 25, 26, 102. 105, 
157. 318. 320 

Elephants 252, 384, 394; Ch. 
184-186; India 100; tails 
fired 167, 186 

Elixir of immortality 107, 
108 s. Immortality 

Embanking rivers 11, 35, 
334, 379, 342 

Emblems en robes 11, 344, 
379 

Embroiderers 204, 384 

Empan 385 

Emperor 151. 336 ; two 
great 203 

Empire 70, 203, 389 

Emporia successive, s. Tsih- 
moh, Kuei-Ki, Mou, Tung- 
yeh, Hoppu, Kattigara, 
Zabai 

Erathosthenes 367 

Erh-fu, s. Ni-fu 329 

Erh-sze, s. Ni-sze 

Eridu 96 

Erythroean sea traders : 96, 
106, 198, 169, 181, 233, 
298, 338, 385, 387 ; changes 
81, 156-8. 239. 241. 259, 
387. 392; navy 106, 178. 
262, 387 

Esag-gil 231 

Eschatology 348, 380 j 

Estrangement of Ch. st. 138 



/ 



Etymology Ch. 29ri 
Eunuchs .S84 
Euphrates 102, lO.") 
Europe 114, ;U4 
Exposing for drought 90, 

:58(; 
Eyes: blue 87, :577, 318 ; 

two on ships 10(), 178, 

Ezekiel's animals H58 



Fabulous figures 1(!9 

Fahien, Fahian 87, 45, :}1H, 
385 

Fairy islands 107, 108, 109, 
111, 113, 111. i:.8, 173. 
178, 218, *:{t;0, S87 - 

False : gems 2(')8, 271 ; hier- 
oglyphs ISo 

Family names 374. s. Sings 

Fang-hu 107. IDS, 109, 113 ; 
Fangtchang 108, 110, 113, 
*180. 181; Lwan-wei 110 

Fang-kiu-Peng-lai 110 

Fan-li 182. 191 

Fans 379 

Fan-tsiuen 818, 323 

Feathers ; hill 187 ; mud 
232 ; shed 2i;7 ; wild birds 
76 

Female ; abyss 126, 12s 

Fen-tien 12s, 147 

Ferghana : conquered 220-1 ; 
route 308 

Feudal princes 7") 

Figures local value 379 

Fines 379 

Finger nail flower 190, 24(! 

Fir-balsam 26.>, 270. 381, 
383 

Fire : Avestic sorts 1()4, 166 ; 
central 339 ; director Kll. 
I, 162 ; drill 11, KHJ, 167 ; 
female 1()0: flint l(i6,*208b, 
210b, 364, 389 ; friction 
11, 13, 168 ; goddess 160 ; 
gyration 11. 168 ; invented 
364 : isl. 269, 262 ; of lit- 
erature 140, mirrors 16.'>, 
166, 167, 364; Mt. 21.5, 
. 272 ; ploughing 168, 374 ; 
processes 1 68 ; renewal 
160 ; sawing 168, 374 : 
syringe 168, 364 ; Vedic 
166 ; worship 90, 94. 886 

Fish-hawk's head 106 

Fishmen 24, 97, 1<;9, ♦349, 
387 

Fish oil 180 

Five: fires 164, 166, 386; 
days 9, 378 ; dragons 175 ; 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



elements 79, 81-3, 174, 
214, 362, 378; fairy isl. 
xKpr ; notes 374 ; planets 
288,358, 378; regents 361 ; 
Tis 361 

Flint l«i6, 168. *208b, 210b, 
364, 389 

Floods 21, 173. 834, 33.5, 
347 

Flower boats 262, 370 

Flowery-land 4, 71, pass. 
310 

Flowing sands 213, 3S2. pass. 

Flutes : single, double 344, 
380 ; three-holed 384 

Flying-bridge .58 

Fords 329, 331 

Foreigners : adviser, 21.5, 
207. 386 : aversion 204 ; 
Lin-tao 207b, 20Sb ; avoid 
239 ; lore 141 ; ships 2.59 ; 
useful 204 ; welcomed 
134, 138, 204, 382, 384 
38S 

Fortunate isl. s Fait:y isl. 

Fossile men 347 

Four : cardinal points, s.v. ; 
div. day 339. 878; eyed 
animal 364, 386 ; moun- 
tains 19, 20, 347, 380; 
seasons 9, 378 

432 years 23 

Fowl 380 ^^ 

Fox, nine tailSjWSy 

Friction, s. Fire-^ 

Fright, Elixir for 231 ; figu- 
re, 72 

Fu, mirror 165, 167 

Fuh 1,32 

Fuh-hi 22, 109, 149. 169 

Fu-li-garden 246, 391 

Fuh-muh 289, 371 

Funam - Phnom - Cambodia 
ISS, 240. 247, 261, 354 
395; ships 115-6, 260 

Funerals, nat. 374 

Fung-ho, 235 

Fung-hou 324 ; Fung-hu 324 

Fung-kii 319. 324 

Fu-pa 394, 222 

Furnace, worship, 160, 162 
217 

Furs, precious 51, 198, 371 

Fusang. 353 

Fu-tcha 262 

Fu-tze 236 < 

Fu-yh 209b 

Fu-yu 362 

Gablan, Gobharana 213 
Gandalarit, Gandhara 56, 
60 



403 



Garlic: great 230, 391, 
small 379 

Garuda, 169, 179 

Gate : of gates 209 ; of hea- 
ven 301 ; Town 375, 379 

Gathas 157 

Genii, isl. 173, s. Fairy isl. 

Geometry 183 

Ghari 280 

Girls : dancing 180 ; nice 
204 ; sacrifice 90. 359 

Glass 268. 271 ; sent for 261; 
coloured 182. 246, 24?, 
392 

Glutton figure 71 

Gnomon 10, 1.50, 277, 878, 
Bab. 279 ; pierced 78, 277 

God : chief 320 ; darkness 
90 ; drought 329 ; fate 
162 ; fire 90, 94 ; hearth 
162, 386; local 151; north 
173 : personal 380 ; roads 
211 ; and spirits 91 ; star 
300 

Gog and Magog 205 ^-^ 

Golanagara 57 

Gold 85, 88, 204, 252, 328, 
331, 379, 394 ; Ants 271 ; 
horse 223 ; ox 364 ; statue 
208b, 209b, 220 ; mother 
370 

Gotra 89, 386 

Grass : cloth 374 ; dogs 137; 
pampas 267, 271 

Graving knife 15 

Grease, valuable ISO 

Great men, sacrificed to 
355, 79 

Great wall 205, 209 

Greco-Bactrians 214, 224 : 
Lycians 82 ; Romans 
244 

Grecque scroll 72 

Greek : Alchemy, 214, 217, 
390 ; Astronomy 282 ; 
Astrology 89-112, 385 : civi- 
lisation 217 ; influence 
216, 230-1, 390-1 ; mer- 
chantmen 394 ; state con- 
quered 392, 224; words 
220, 224-5 ; Lesser state 
225; 

Green-paint 204 

Gryphon 169 

Gtsub 13 

Gudea, 14, 15, 26, 32, 96, 
345, 378 

Guild-Merchants loi! 

Gulel 195 

Gurra 127 

Gynecocracy 874, 32, 351 

Gyration, fire by, 168 



lu/ 



404 



ALPHABETICAL INDRX. 



•208, 
235. 



Kaltigara 



t)4. 



tapered 



13'.t. 
126, 
fire 

Son 



Hagar 108 

Hainan isL 110, 115, 240, 

241 ; pearls 241 ; 
Hair: animal 1X8; dress 

72, 3o4. 379 ; pins 204 
Haktai 250, 393 
Hami HI 4 
Han : dialect 243 ; dyn. 60, 

62, 92, lOs, 206. pass ; 

Huanti 2")3 ; VVenti 390 ; 

Wuti o3, 112, 113. 

207b, 219, 230, 231 

2"iO, pass, Yuanti 225 
Han-hai 314 
Han state 146, 152 
Handswipe, s Shaduf 
Hanoi, not 

*242 
Hantchung 212, 21n, 367 
Harpagornis 170 
Harpsichord 374 
Hatshopsitu 97, 99 
Hatti 102 
Head : dress 82 ; 

307, 318, 324, 377 

Hearth, gods of, 163 

. Hea^ven : quit of 20, 

377; and earth 79 

128, 165, 37S, 384 

166; Lord of 172 ; 

of 377 
Heavenly kings 23, *348, 365 
Heft-iklim 309 
Heh : r. 266-9 ; tchi 115, 360 
Helike 289 
Hemodii mts. 251 
Hemp 3:.0, 382, 391 
Heng-shan 240-1, 242, 389, 

392 
Henna 182, 235, 238, 246, 

389, 391 
Herat 268, 311 
Hermaeus 221, 223, 225, 393 
Hermit caves 196, 197, 38t; 
Hero-worship 79, 355 
Hi-Ho, 286 

Hia: 69, 150. 223, 381; cal- 
endar 3, 47, 48, 381 ;==:z 

Ketchi 307 ; in Ki 74, 

140; Sha 321 
Hia : hou ki 151 ; Ti Mang 

94 ; Ti Sieh 94 
Hiafei 261. 284 
Hia-fu-tchi 160 
Hiaiki rhin. 179, 183 
Hia-koh 276, 3(;5 
Hiang-liang 345 
Hiao Wenti 218 
Hien : r. 313 ; tchi 3")8-9 ; 

tu 222, 226, 311 
Hien-yuen 318, 326, 327 ; 

chiefs 322 



Hieroglyphs 19, 292, 375 

High-cheek bones 377 

Hills and rivers worsh. 287, 
374, 383 

Hindus: colonies of 56, 57, 
91, 108, 117, Burma 121, 
250, 387, Java 259; Szet 
chuen 52, 54, *196, 363. 
387 ; cosmography 173 ; 
cosmogony 173-4 : gods 
figures 169, 170, 173,365, 
388; influence 91, 157, 
158, 173, 187, 20Sb, 389; 
sea-traders 158; names in 
Indo-China 158 

Hindu Kush 110; Hien-tu 
shan311 

Hints 292 

Hippalus 243, 394 

Hippocentaurs 169, 387 

Hippostratus 224 

Hippuri 251 

Hiran* 102, 243 

Hissarlik 351 

Historical : periods 380 ; 
works 317 

Hittites 4, 15 

Hiuen:— Ming 90. 95. 160; 
pu 266 ;-tchi 266 ; -Tsang 

, 267-313 ;-Wu 358 
(Hiungnus 50, 60, 61, 190, 
249, 254, 392 ; incursions 
218-9 ; language 190. 223 ; 
not a race 223 — 

Hiu-tu 211 

Hohkwan-tze 149, 2S9 

Hoh-hu, Ho-lii. 133. 165 

Hoh:-she 216 ; tchou 325 ;- 
tchung 237 

H6-kiu-ping 208b 

Ho-ku 301 

Ho-ling 113, 262 

Honey, stone, 234 

Hooked spear 192 

Ho Peh 90, 94, 268 

Ho-pei-tsien IIH 

Hoppu 241, 246, 389, 390, 
392, 393, 394 

Horary vase 280-1 

Hormuzia trad. 182, 240, 
241, 235, 387, 3.S9, 390. 
• 392, 393 

Horns 180, 204, 234,244, 388 

Horse 204, 207. 208. 222. 
343. 3.57. 380. 383; har- 
nessing 11,*381; Manes 
dyed 357, 383-4 ; blood 
perspiring 219, 224, 391 ; 
Nisaean i/>(<i -riding 17(1; 
sacrifice 137, 362 

Jiorse-stioe tomb 119, 191. 
386 



Ho-tih 114 

Ho-tsung 268. v. Ho peh 
Hou 150 :-Y 265, 335 
Hours, double 9, 339 : fixed 

378 ; variable 230. 282 
House 162, 374, 379 ;-cricket 

163 
Hu, bearded bar bar. 176, 

207, 234, 249, 275, 314. 

:s(;5, 389 
Hwa;-kwa 114;-Miao 125;- 

su 325 ;-ti niu 242, 392 
Hwai-wan-tze 284, pass ; 

death 368 
Hwan : kung 151 ; tchou 

110 ; yuen 148 
Hwang 151 ; ho 80. 224, 

3;S6; Lao 14.S, 149, 151. 

209b; pu mi 2. «, 151, 

317, 324; shu 266; tche 

or Hormuzians 181, 182, 

189, 232, 235, 240, 2^i\, 

3fi6, 3cS9, 393 
Hwangti, pass. ; arrival 381 ; 

death 333 ; migration 321 ; 

officers 347 ; in Tchuh 

141 ; unsuccess 329 ; 

years 330 
Hwei : r. 179 ; influencing 

light 339 ; luh, Hwuy-luh, 

90, 95. 160, 162 
Huk 236 
Hukit219 
Huliang 113, v. Holing. 

Java 
Huma 230, v. Sesamum 
Human : figures 133, 137, 

138; fire 166; rings 348; 

sacrifices 132, 134. 13S, 

359. 362-3 
-Hjl NaL- Khunte 27. 319, 

320-1,372, 37?, v. Huangti 
Hundred: families, inexact, 

24, 209, 306 ; standard 

339, 379 
Hung: li. 319; lu 266, 26« ; 

shui 325 
..-'Huns 215 
Hunts, royal, 184. 268 
Huo. or Hwo : Kuan 166, 
*208b; lin^Huliang~Ho- 

ling=^Java 181 ; shan 

215 ; tchou 269, 276 ; tsi 

268 
Hupeh231 

Husbandman 3S0, 379 
Hu-shen 208 
Hu-sheng 284 
Hu : suan 229 ; sui 227 ; 

tcheng 192; tou 227 ; tze 

149. 364 
Hwun. Hwan 348 



ALPHABKTICAL INDEX. 



405 



Hydraulic works 342-8 
Hydropyrum latifolium 217, 

V. Soma 
Hypobarus 232 

laon, yuan, 221 

Ideographical reform 8(5 

Identities 21)2 

Id-lal 120 

I-hi-wei 123, 12o 

Ikshvakus 236 

Ilu 2()6 

Image, wooden, 333, 3G2 

Imagery H9, '.)1, 114, l(i9, 
385 

Imbrication 357 

Immanence of uncivilised 
373 

Immortals 109, 114 

Immortality, drug of, 107, 
inB. 197, 206, 214, 217, 
2 ;:'., 270, 387 ; shrub of, 
114, 237 

Imperial government 19, 
3,s0 

Importations of the I3aks 
141,377,378-380; by Shuh 
191. 198; General 381-% 

Increase of writing S7, 37-'), 
184, 185 

India and : Arabia 97 ; Ass.- 
Bab. 97, 101 ; Indo-China 
and Ch. 67 ; Judaea 99 ; 
Shuh-Szetchuen 64, 65, 
*196, 197, 369, 386, 392; 
Ts'u 117, 118, 170, :}86 

Indian ; Archip. 114 ; 
Coinage 119 ; Cosmogony 
387; Influence 104; liter- 
ature 174 ; monkeys 38, 
78, 97, 100 : ocean trade 
89, 91, 107, 108, 158, 166; 
paper 2.")1, 393 ; plants 
247, 391 ; rhinoceros 179, 
183 ; ships 247, 248, 26(1; 
shot 247, 391 ; synchron. 
H67 ; trade 51, 66, 107 ; 
east coast. 56, 78, 102, 103, 
108, 109, V Orissa; Tu- 
yu 387, V. Anachorets, 
Buddhists 
Indo-China, route 158 
Indo-Erythraean influence 
387 ; Persian 386, traders 
233, 234, 240, 258 
Indonesia 111 
Indigo 87. 374 
Inlaying metal 86, 3S4 
Inscription of Yii 192 ; in- 
scriptions 380 
Intercalary month 9, 11, 79, 
288, 378 



Iniercourse, west 131, .391 
Invention for Adoption 279 
Irano-Indian influence 73 
Irawady, colonies 5(), 387 
Iran 85, 2(»1, 252, 374, 379, 

382, 394 ; south-north 

283 ; ware 198 
Irrigation 11, 379 
Ish-ban 324 
Iskander 205, 208 
Isolation of Ch. 29. 308, 310 

314 
Issedons 355 
Ivory 99, 184.204.245, 388 



Jade 41, 204, 31. 34, 40; 
chisel 34 ; cup 390 ; mic- 
roscope on 351,*3r2; mines 
309, 312-3, 325, in Burma 
*353, Nan-shan 325, 326, 
Turkestan 389, pass. ; ob- 
jects in Ass. Bab. 32, 34, 
.309, 312, Hissarlik 351, 
India, 42 ; poly tropic *351; 
rings 264, 265 ;- taste for 
377 ; traffic 30. 46, 207, 
382-3-4, 390. routes 309. 
385 ; white and dark 313, 
318. 325, 384 
Jadeite 33, 39, 40, 41 ; 
Burma 388 ; pik 41 ; Yun- 
nan 41 ; white 351 
Jaggery 366 
Jahve 122 
Jail 357 
Jangars 260 

Japan, ancient 138 ; coloni- 
zed 210, 367 ; no navy 
119 
Jasmine, Jessamine is2, 234, 

389 
Jasper 33 

Java 37, 45, 108, 113, 181, 
189, 247, 259, 261, 280. 
393 ; J -Bali 360 
Jeh-kwei 277 
J^h-nan, jihnan 68 
Jehoshaphat 243 
Jen, tribes 61, 6() 
Jen-Hiao 237, 370 
Jen-Kia-Man 66 
}eti-Karakchi 2s9 
jewel of Tch'en 135 
Jews 166, 168, 253, 256, 257, 

370, 394 
Joan of Arc, Tungkinese 

261 
Joh shui.327, 330 
Joshua's feat 218 
Jugglers 391, 394 
Juh r. 266-7 



Jujube 47.198, 374 
Julian year 339 
Jungs :J0. 31, 75. 76, 91 ; 
Tartar 207 ; Teks 80, 284 
Junk 26 ) ; largest 26 
Junk-Ceylon 256 
Jupiter cycle 78, 93 
Ju-tou-kou370 
Jyotisha 282 



Ka, Bai, Khu, 348 
Kabulis*an 221, 393, 3fl 
Kachab 300 
Kachins 168 
Kai-lo-shen 215 "\ 

Kai-mings 52, *196. 199, 346 
Kai-t'ien 179, 368; yang 156 
Kalang 189 
Kalas 280 

Kalingas 113, 114, 181,247 ; 
Java 113, 393 ; navy 257 
Kalmucks-Torguths 311 
Kam-mu 273, 274. 325, 370 
Kan : ten 340 ; kung 287, 298 
Ian, ran 246, 255 ; to-li, tu- 
lu' 366 ; tsiang 165 ; tsiao 
246 ; yng 223, 394 ; 
yii 246 
Kandar pass. 309, 312 
Kang, c. 328 ; mt. 134 ; kiu 
219, 222, 309, 393, tai 261 
Kanishka 367 
Kansuh S.W. to S. Shansi 

328 
Kao,118,120; duk6S; houlSi^ 
kiu 223 ; Pen jung 31o, 
she 207b ; Sin Ti Kuh 76, 
140, 141, 143, 161, 162, 
334, 336, 381 ; Tsu of Han 
161,235,389; YangTchuan 
hiiih s.v. 76, 141, 143. 
Kap, Gafi, Kafu 99. 
Kapilanagara 59 ; Kapila- 

vastu 56 
Kapisa 368 
Karashar 212, 265, 267-8, 



272, 298, 325, 335, 381, 

3H2-3-4-8, 393, 395 
Karens, Karengs 59, 371, 254 
Karkemish 36, 105 
Kasan 216. 

Kashgar 308, 384, 395 
Kashtu 321,324 
Kasiap Matang 213 
Kassi 321 ; Kassite 323 
Kassia, v. Cassia 
Kattigara 68, *240-2, 244, 

247, 261, 3!t0, 392-395 
Kauthala, Oudh 59 
K'eh 280 
Kentu, India 50, 53, 122 



406 



ALPHABETICAL LNDEX. 



Ke-p'in 311, 221, 393, 230 

Kerwankush 289 

Kesho 67. 68, *242 

Khaidin Kua 267 

Khaidu gol 267 

Khamil 314 

Khammurabi 101, 320, 341, 

345 
Khas 331 
Khest wood 9it 
Khorasan 383, x 
Khorasmians 12, 80, 31, 38, 

73, 77, 78, 350, 357, 384 
Khorsabad 1(I5 
Khotan 74, 75. 77, 195, 312, 

361 
Khryse 51 

Khshathra-Vairya 74 
Ki.-ten 23, *348, 387 ; hun- 
dred 78 
K'i 348 
Kia, Sing 307 
Kiah of Yn 339 
Kiai 92 

Kia-lang-y 344 
Kiang r. 199; Hang 173; 

Taikung 171-2; Ts'en 

67 
Kiangs tr. 61, 66, 73, 219, 

249 
Kiao mt. 333 : tchi 67, 261, 

370 
Kiao-tchou, gulf, 89, 103, 

157, 158, 178, 240, 385 
Kiao-tung 215. 218 
Kieh, spear 192; Kao 119: 

Kuei 275, 382 ; shih 149, 

174, 207b 
Kien, drum 208 ; tchang 113 ; 

tchang 52 ; wei 60, 62, 

254 
Ki-fu 58 ; Ku luh 317 ; lian 

370; lien 190; likof Tchou 

80, *355 ; lu 266 
Kiln-huts 278 
Kimbun-Lusar 311 
Kin Tartars 138 ; Mu 370 ; 

lin 255 ; sui 166; pei 326 
King St. 190; lu 211; 

ti of Han 183, 214 ; tsing 

230, 231: of Ts'i 262; 

tcheng 328 
Kings, mythical, 22, 377, 380 
Kingfishers 204, 208, 234, 

252, 394 
Kirghizes 30, 304, 355, 77. 

V. Ki-lik 
Ki-she, penality 209 ; shit 

256 
Kitan 382 
Kitchen god 160, 161, 162. 

163, 287 



Kitchung 350, 382 

Kit-hu 281 

Ki-tze 17, 192, 195, 360 

Ki-wei 160, 161 

Kiii, St. 89, 196; e.xtol 363; 

shu 195 ; sou or su, Wak- 

han 324,370, 371,381,382, 

386 ; Sze-Kao-tchang 215, 

308 
Kiu : and Li 332, 334, 337, 

376 ; lung 67 ; to 345 : tse- 

Kutcha 86 : yuen 2.52 
Kiueh Kung 36i) 
Kiuen-jungs err. for Kuen- 

jungs 
Kiuh-ti 204, 208 
Kiuh-lao 270 
Kiuns 36 
K'iun-yiih 266,-9 
Kiung l'.i8, 254 ; sang 333 ; 

Tsoh 60 ; yuk 48 
Kiut 195 
Kun-wu. Kungu. 86, 286, 

310, 382 
Ki-yng 277 
Knotted cords 374 
Ko-hung 29'.t 
Kok-bozat 289 
Kokhab 299 

Kokonor 86, err. Kukunor 
Kolandiophanta^ 260 
Kom - the- long -robed 318, 

323, 327, 379 
Ko-ngai 167 

Kophen 221. 230, 311, 393 
Ko-tou, Koh-tou 15, 16, 20, 

192 
Ko-tchung 234, 237, 252 
Kotymbae 260 
Kou: chen 300; K'i 270; 

tche daria 2<)9 ; tsien 262, 

178 
Krakatao 113 
KU, shui 353 
Ku, tr. 326 ; wu 328 
K'u 266; K'i 270 Kwa 270 ; 

shan 266-9 
Kua or Kwa, lu 314 ; tchou 

216. 388 
Kuan or Kwan 161; Feng 

3."i7 ; hiung 328 ; shu 214 ; 

y wu 89 ; tze 33, 37, 45, 

*352, pass. 
Kuang or Kwang ; si 110 ; 

tchen tze 327; tchu 41, 

256 ; yuen 267 
Kuarism, Kwarism.v. Khor- 
asmians 
Kudang 38 
Kudremale 255 
Kudur Nakhunte 6, 24, 26, 

320, 321, 37b 



Kuei or Kwei 246, 277, 348, 
375 ; Ki 115, 178, 182, 183, 
230, 2:!4, 263, 387, 388, 
389 ; Kuh tze 284 ; lin 55, 
58, 193, 236; shan 220, 
224 ; shin 242 ; tsang 147, 
151, 175 ; yang 370; yu 
kiii 323 

Kuen-jungs 35, 89, 187 ; re- 
moved 356, 357 

Kuen-lun, Kiin-lun 4, 32, 
173, 266, 252, 256, 327, 
371 

Kufas 114, V. Coracles 

Kukunor 86, 187, 313 

Kumongs 66 

Ku Nak Khunte, v. Hu Nak 
Khunte 

Kiin-kuei 192 

Kun-mi, Kun-mo, Kun- 
mings 61, 62. 66, 115. 223 
249 ; fair haired 250. 252 
273, 275, 394 

Kung : kia 319. 382 ; ku 114 
kung 161 ; Ngan kwoh 
140 ; shan 326 : sun 31S 
Szeyu 179 ; tchang fu= 
shan 326, 328, 330, 367 
tia pin 369 ; tsiok 237, v. 
peacock, tung 327 ; wu 262 

Kurla 325 

Kurma avatara, 107, 109 

Kushites 80, 96, 98, 102 

Kustana 355, v. Khotan 

Kutcha, Kutze 222, 216, 267, 
365, 384, 388 

Kutche 324 

Kut-lu 89 

Kutthi 26 

Kuvera, 74, 174 

Ku-wen 15, 17, 27, 845. 346 ; 
spell. 185, 186, 199, 226, 
300, 303, 354, 355 

Kii-yao 275 

Kwun 170 



Lack of criticism 817 

Lacquer 374 ; lacquered tab- 
lets 345 

Ladies boats 262, 370 

Lagash 307 

Lamps, abestos 180, 388 

Lan : tai 213 ; tchou 367 ; 
tsang kiang 252 

Lang-ya, lang-ga 36, 89, 90, 
93, 107, 134, 137, 147, 148, 
152, 155, 156, 158, 160, 
166, 240, 385 ; Tai 352 

Lanka 36. 103. Iu6, 107 ; to 
Lang-ga 36, 352 ; Barusas 
112 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



407 



Lao-shan 100; shih shing, 

shing shing 275, 382 
Lao-tze 91. 95, 125, 139 ; 

journey 122, 211, at Kho- 

tan 361 ; no love 126, 127; 

origin 120-2, 124, 192, 

197 
Lapislazulijl87, 309, 312, 31S 
Law, in Egypt. Chald , 

Chin., 347 
Lead, 252, 379, 394 
League, Su-Ts'in, 177 
Leather drums 329, 38U 
Lei-tsu 325, 331 
Lendjabalous 36, 369, v. 

Nicobar 
Lenses, burning 391, 216 
Leopard skins 99 
Li 121, 123, 124, 335, 337; 

tr. 334; coracles 215; of 

Kiang 196; v. Kiu and 

Li 
Li: fang 208b, 209b, 368; 

Kwang-Ii 220 ; Laotan 

120 ; min 305, 335, three 

meanings 347 : ni 55 ; pei 

252 ; shu 204 ; sze 149, 

204. 207; tchaoKiun 214; 

tchi 246 
Liang 198 ; Hwei of 170 ; hi 

187 ; north 271 
Library : state 125, 127, 210, 

317. 345 
Lieh-tze. Lieh-yu kou 91, 

107, 126. 149, 152, 168, 

170, 173, 180, 189, 364, 

pass. V. Hu-tze 
Life of 120 years 11, 24, 380 
Light of Asia 210 
Likien 58, 222, 224 
Limuryke 51 
Lin: erh 211: hu 176; tao 

207b. 210b. 213, 214, 2L5, 

330, 389 
Ling : drum 208 ; ling 370 ; 

lun 330 ; shan 269 ; wang 

287 
Lions 222. 237. 394 
Lists of civilisation 9-27 ; 

corrected 376 
Literary mosaic 55 
Liu : 301 ; Kiu-tze 246 ; li 

256 ; po shan 332 ; sha 

310: shang 115 ; shu 317; 

tcheng 222 : yng of Ts'u 

20yb 
Lo 115 

Loadstone 45, v. compass 
Lob and Kank 310 
Localisations, late 329 
Lofty terraces 11, 343,379, 

V. Tai 



Loh. r. 320, 328, 330; shu 

328; tchi 266; yang 125, 

78, 150 
Lolo writing 45, 198, 201 
Lombok 110, 113 
Long : armed 2i)9 ; dresses 

318, 323. 327. 379 ; eared 

121, 124. 361, 386; legs 

328. 331 
Lopnor 224, 267. 313 
Lou 300 ; iron 85 : fan 172 ; 

Ian 219, 254 ; tchuen 260-2 
Love, no in Lao-tze 125. 127 
Lo-yueh 236 

Lii ; shan 253 ; shen 345 
Lu 90, 94, 146, 156, 160 ; 'an 

sheng 231 ; sheng 207b 
Luan-ta 207b, 214 ; wei 1 10 
Lucern 219, 220, 229. 391 
Lucky, 10, 379 
Lufen 58 
Luhkia 233-4 
Luk, jadeite 41 
Lumbini 211 
Lun-tai 225 
Lunar mansions 28, 80, 78, 

81, 340, 350, 356, 378, 383 
Lung : hien 359 ; kia 305 ; 

pak 107, 109, 111 : tsiuen 

207 : yen 246 
Lycium 270 
Lydian coins 118, 191, 193, 

217 

Madratse 260 

Maes Titianus 222, 240, 243, 

395 
Magadha, Muktu 174, 176, 

365 
Magi 82 ; Magical tricks 174, 

175 
Magnet 283, 284, 383 
Magnetic iron 45, 269 
Magnifying glasses 176, 182, 

268, 365. 388 
Magnolia 242, 244, 392 
Mahacina 247, 395 
Maiden drowned v. girl's 

sacrifice 
Magpies, 'Celestial 301 ; cf. 

289, 371 
Mailcoats 319, 366 
Makiun 45, 284 
Malabar coast 99, 260 
Malabathrum 66 
Malacca : peninsula 37, 291 ; 

straits 111, 113. 2.i-5, 2.-)9, 

261 ; avoided 181,387 
Malei 56 
Mallai 234 
Maluth 278, 279 
Man tr. 196 



Mana, Mina 10, 36, 101, 104. 

378, 385 
Manacles 379 

Manazils 78 ; v. lunar man- 
sions 
Mandshu Tartars 136 
Manes dyed 357, 383-4 
Mang tr. 61 
Mango 238 
Ma-ngu isl. 2.")3, 25(;, 262, v. 

Moluccos 
Man-tze caves 197 
Mao, Pleiades 300-1, 340 ; 

yii 200 
Marcius Philippus 278 
Marco-Polo 169 
Marduk 22 
Margarita 189 
Mariba 102 

Marinus Tyrius 222, 242, 395 
Marionnettes 384 
Marine terms 105 
Market of the valley 213 
Marriage laws 374 ; Muh 

Wang's daughter 35, 268, 

271, 352 
Marvels, taste for 208b 
Mass of gems 266, 267, 272 
Mastiffs, Tibet 47, 48, 49, 

197, 384 
Masula boats 260 
Mats 379 

Mathematics 179, 189, 387 
Matsya-Avatara 109 
Maurya script 198 
Magdeism 83, 104, 157, 165 
Me, bleating 190 
Meandre 72 
Measures, standard 89, 378, 

385 
Medicine books 152, 206 
Media 82, 90, 93 ; trade 159, 

380, 385 
Mediterranean 390, v. red 

corals 
Megas 220 

Meh-ti, Mih-tze 149,152, 180 
Mengs, Muongs 186 
Mengtien 205 
Mengtze, Mencius 6, 149 
Merchants' hill 382 
Mercury 386, 388 ; and Mica 

218, V. Cinnabar 
Merkhet 281 
Merv, amber of 231 
Meshed, tin of 26, 309, 311 
Meslem 99 
Metallic cauries 118 
Metallurgy 11, 8.5-6, 165,167, 

379, 382, 386 
Meton 10 
Miao-tze 125 



408 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



Microscope on jade 312, 35] 
Middle Kingdom 20. 22, 315, 

319, 380 
Midian coast 96 
Midnight : day 73 
Mien, r. 196 
Migrations 310-1, 321 
Mih-hiang 246 
Milfoil 92 

Military Art 164, 166 
Milky-way 289, 299 
Millet, Ital 374, Comm. 379 
Min, r. 40, 179, 196, 199: 

caves 197, 208b, 386; slian 

184 ; tchou 215, 330 ; yueh 

115, 179, 209b, 233, 234, 

260, 389, 390 
Minaeans 100 
Mincopies 113 
Ming— ho-tchi 261, 285; ki 

134, 136 ; ti of Han 209b, 

of Wei 284 ; yueh,-guet 

180, 189, 204, 246.255 
Ministeries, six ideal 151 ; 

ten, 319, 347 
Minnagara 100 
Mint, state 217. 391 
Mintpalm 250, 389 
Minutize, historical 251 
Mirdjai. Miritan, Mit, mt. 

31. 325-6 
Mirrors, 251, 268, 392 ; con- 
cave 165; metallic 213. 

216. :{90 ; sun 167 ; moon 

168 
Missions foreign 38-44, 51, 

pass. 
Missions to Central Asia 50, 

62. 200, *219, *253, 219- 

222, 230, 390-1; to India 

61, 249, 391 
Missouri Kurds 97 
Mi-sung 250, 3S9 
Mock objects, 134, 136, 137, 

385 ; Suns 218, 3c9 
Mogan 290 
Mogaung 40, 42 
Moh-ya 165, 207 
Mois 331 
Mo-li 234 
Moluccas 253, 256, 259. 366, 

395 
Momien 39, 41 
Momordica charantia 269 
Monetary Unions 385, S9, 

155 
Money, metallic 36, v. coins, 

ring-money 
Mongol sacrifice, SO 
Monkeys 38, 78. 97, 99, luO, 

182. 384 
Monosvllabism 293-4 



Monotheism 346, 348 

\lonsoons 244, 394 

Months names 9 ; Akka. 

Bab. 94, 385 ; Sem. Bab. 

9, 93, 358, 385 
Moon female 168, 378 
Moral laws, foreign, 3St 
Mortar 379 

Mortgage, antichretic 347 
Mosaic, literary 55 
Mother of Pearl 98, 365. 387 
Mother, status 380; Uni- 
verse 126, 128; writing 14. 

305, 380 
Mou 179, 183, 388; y 195; 

yuen 26(i, 273 
Mountains, opened 319 ; re- 

verer 323 
Muh Kung of Ts'in 207, 215, 

386 
Muh-Kua 93. v. Quince, 

Papaya 
Muh Tien tze tchuen 189, 

265, 313, *360 
Muhuratas 280 
Muh Wang 32, 77, 80, 119, 

131, 173,* 175,265-71.310. 

313-4, 384 
Mu-Koh, 262; Ian 242, 392; 

nao 344, 387 ; pang 67 
Mai 300 
Mulcts 379 
Music, Duodenary scale 10, 

330, 340 ; seven 394 ; on 

stones 374 
Muslin pearled 257 
Mutsri 97 
Muziris 99, 394 
Mythical chronology 387, 

23 ; Kings 22, 29, 323 
Myths 89. 91, 141, 168, 170, 

188. pass. 
Mythography 16;'> 



Nabonidus 320 ; Nabonassar 

37 
Nacreous mussels 180. 188 
Naga race 35 
Nagar 59 
Nagit 102 
Nai Hwangti 26, 269 v. 

Hwang-ti 
Naked men 38 
Nakhunte 4, 26, 320, 378 
Nakshatras 355 v. Lunar 

Mansions 
Nala 40 
Nam-Elam 26 

Names, personal 74, 79, 380 
Nana 320 
Nancowry isl. v. Nicobar 



Nan-hai 235, 236, 369 ; ho 

301 ; shan :^08, 313 ; tou 

299 
Nan-yueh, Empire, 58, 62, 

186, 209b, 233. 234. 235. 

240, 249, 250, 260, 389. 

390. 391 
Nar 37, 229 
Naramsin 372 
Narcotic 250, 365, 387, 389 
Nard 235, 391 
Narru Marratu 102 
Nasks 206, 365 
Native tr. 75 ; civilisation, 

373-5 
Navel of Heaven 172 
Navigation 91, 92, 261, 181, 

113 
Navy, Ch., 112, 260, 262, 

390; foreign 103, 113, 115. 

178, 181, 259-263 
Nayee 282 
Nearchos 108. 157. 158. 189, 

190 
Nebuchadnezzar 98 
Negrito-Pygmies 111, 244 
Negroes 80 
Neko II. 106 
Nele, Nere. Nili. 39. 40. 255, 

353, 384 
Nelkynda 394 
Nema serikon 51, 53 
Neo-Monosyllabism 293, 342 
Neo- raoism 145, 147, 151, 

176, 206, pars. 
Nephelium longam 246 
Nephrite Jade, 73, 77, 213, 

351 
Nest dwellers 375 
Ngai-lao, v. Ai-lao 
Ngai-Nap 250. 389 
Ngan-Ki Sheng 207b, 218 
Ngao mastiffs, 197 ; shin 

162 
Ngou-lo 233, 236, 369; ye 

165 
Nhitnam, Jehnan, 240. 241, 

392, pass. 
Nicobar isl. 36, 108, 110-U5, 

233, 369 
Ni-fu Erh-fu, 329 
Nimrod 98 
19-year period 10, 288, 332. 

*338, *341. 379, 385 
Nineveh 102 
Ning 5, v. 333 
Ninus 3H 
Nippur 297 
Ni-sze, Erh-sze, 220 
Nisoean horses 219, 224, 391. 

892 ; general 220 
Niu 301 



ALPHABETICAL INDKX. 



409 



Nomes 36 

Nomi-no-Sukune 187 

Non-Chinese st. 20»tb ; Con- 
fucianists 142 ; first print- 
ing 345 

Noon, day, 78 

Noras 39, 42 

North-god 173 ; influence 
1 76 ; Pole 2'.»lt ; Route 249 

Nose, beginning, 30(5. 38(i 

Notched sticks 374 

Novelties, liked, 18U 

Nu, crossbow, 19-5 

Numerical properties 10, 82, 
83, 379 ; names 3U4 

Nij-kwa 1(59, 175, 349, 365 

Nu Tsi 351 ; Tsih 351 ; or 
Niii-tsieh 331 

Nutmeg 181, 253, 366, 370 



O 114 

Oannes 97 

Observations, gnomon 78 

Official intercourse 227 

Oh-pak 94 

Old : and new ideas 147-8 ; 

texts 17 ; traditions 147 , 
Oman 190 ; amber 223 ; ships 

247, 393, 395 
Omoplatoscopy 377 
Oneiromancy 379 
Onesicritos 108, 158, 19J 
On-Khilien 149 
Onomancy 92 
( )pening with W. 223 
Ophir 39. 97, 99, 100 
Orange 247, 374 
Ordo 212 

Ores, special 88, 382 
Organ, Reed 380 
Orientation 162, 277 ; of 

buildings 342. 379 
Origin, W. 292: to Jade 

Mines 317 
Orissa 56, 117, 251 ; to 

Burma 387 
Orkham 322 
Orpiment 214, 217, 390 
Ostanes 214 
Ostrich eggs, painted, 99, 

225, 3(;9, 391, 391 
Ownership 347, 38(t 
Ox : driving 380 ; waggons 

333, 379 
Oxus, 110, 371 ; Aksu 371 
O-yk-shan-li 268 
Oyster pearls 252, 394 



Pa region, treaty 54 ; tchung 
52 



Pack-animals 312, 343 

Pacorus 222, 230, 394 

Pagan, old iH> ; new 59 

Pah shen 171. 172; sien 172 

I'ainting 2')8. 367 

Paktyeia 157 

Palmistry 92 

Pamir, routes 308. 312, 321 

Pan. bow 195; Keng 170; 
Ku 317; tchao 221, 222, 
394 ; tu 222, 393 ; tchu 
256 

Papaya 93 

Paper, Indian 250 ; rags 
251 ; silk-refuse 251 ; cot- 
ton 393 ; implements 136 

Parhelion 218. 339 

Parrots 252 

Parsindu 104 

Parsley 229, 391 

Past, living 347 

Parthians 214, 222, 214, 391, 
394 

Paste-gems 268, 384 

Pastors 20, 380 

Pat 329, 350 

Patamar boats 260 

Patna, route 50, 51, 197. 62 

Patriotic histories 317 

Peach 47. 198. 368, 374 

Peacocks 9", 234, 237. 252, 
366, 37U, 384, 388. 389, 
394 

Pear 368 

Pearls trade 180-182, 189 ; 
Ceylon 189. 237. 252, 255- 
6, 324; Hainan 189, 240, 
390; Persian Gulf 180, 
189, 234, 255, 3(55. 387, 
389, 392 ; Muslin 256 ; 
pierced 241 ; spherical 
247. 392 

Pegu 91, 102. 106, 113, 117; 
Shensi to 55, ti4 ; yoma 
56 

Peh, or Poh 348 ; ho 301 ; 
hu 358 ; Ku 55 ; lu 55, 255, 
354 ; ma 209b ; shan 216, 
272, 308; yh355; yngll4; 
yiih 269 ; yung 52, *19t; 

P'ei 125 

Pellet bow 194, 195 

Pencil 204 

Pendant pearls 204 

Peng 168 

Peng-lai 38, 107. 108, 109. 
110, 111 ; V. Tang-kiu, 
yun-shuh ; zi-la-vie 59 

Penongs 331 

Perak 255 

Periods 69, 70 ; disorder 1 45 ; 
numerical 10, 378 



Persia 35, 38 ; and India 

158 ; V. I ndo- Persian ; and 

Muhwang 35, 268, 271, 

352 
Persian 230 ; five elements 

81-2 ; gulf 96. 101, 157-8, 

394 ; seal 207 ; legends 

330. 350 ; words, pass. 
Personal names, v. Name^ 
Pheasants 384 
Phylacteria 169, 170, 171, 

387 
Philippines isl. Ill 
Phoenician navy 96, 102. lO&f 

109, 157, 243. 360 
Phoenixes 328. 339. 353 
Piao 277 ; p'iao 41 
Pictorial characters 86, 185, 

292 
Pidjan 267 
Pien-ho 204 ; piao 317 ; tsiao 

218 
Pierced breasts 328, 331 ; 

gnomon 78, 277 
Pih 234 ; Pihwuy 79 
Pih, Pik, Jadeite 41, 353 
Pihatu 354 
Piled houses 374 
Pilgrims 367 
Pima temple 361 
Pine's fingers 270; fat 270 
Pinlang 246, 252 
P'ipa 222. 393 
Pippilika 271 
Pisciculture 182 
Pise : building 377 
Pi-Ts'ao, 162, 287 
Pi-yh 196 
Planets : colours and names 

10, 288,* 338, 358 
Pleiades 10, 78, 289, 300-2, 

340. 
Plough, W. Asiatic 379 
Plowing, fire 168, 374 
Plumb-line 379 
Po r. 308 ; P'o tr. 61 ; dji 

235 
Poh 334 ; yao 268 
Points of space, v. Cardinal 
points ; colours 10, 135, 
208b. 378 
Poisoned; four emperors 214, 

217 
Polarity 283, 383 
Pole, curved 379 ; star 10, 

289. 292, 299 
Poli 108, 110 
Pomegranate 227, 231 
P'ong tribe 46. 48, 331, *353, 

354 
Pool of Heaven 168 
Pooped junks 2(iO 



410 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



Population removed 210b, 

2(13, 3r^6, pass. 
Potters 334, 37:.; wheel 343. 

379 
Pot-wells 343 
Pottery 374, 382 
Prahus 260 
Pre-Chinese 168, 209b, 291: 

astronomy 286, 289, 29.>, 

371 ; civilisation 371-3 
Prime Minister 31P, 347, 380 
Princess Imperial 10') — 51 

B.C., 222 
Printing, first 34") 
Prison 382, 3o7 
Profit on trade 244 
Prognostication 7S, 92 
Prome, earthquake 261 
Pseudo-Runic 338 
Ptarmica Sibirica 383 
Ptolemies 243 
Pu : coins 156 ; lai 95 ; lo-ki 

223; shao 207, 220, 224; 

tchang hai 224 
Pucka : wells 343 
Puh 334 ; Hai 107, 109, 207b ; 

Szemin 114, 233 ; Tchou 

Shan 234, 349. 377, v. 

Badak>-han ; T'ing-hu-yu 

114 
Punt 99 

Puppets in graves 132 
Py 301 
Pygmies 115 
Pyramid, stone 334 
Pyrites 156,* 208b, 210b, 364, 

389 
Pyrolatry 90, 157, 159, 160, 

386 



Quadrants, Animals, 358, 

298 
Queendoms 35, 273, 851 
yuelpaert 110, 115, 210 
guineas 9 ), 93, 159, 180, 182, 

385 
Quisqualis Indica 247, 391 



Rachias 251. 394 
Radishes 374 
Rafts 344, 379 
Ragha 82 
Rain of stones 353 
Rama bridge 58 
Ramesses III. 106 
Ramuth 236 

Rarities 179, 182, 204, 246 
Rastaban 299 

Rats, gnawing, 271 ; s. yel- 
low R., sand R. 



Ratus 365 

Recluses, Sien, 196, 208b. 

210b 
Reconstruction 316 
Red berries 270 ; Bird 358 

corals 235, 243, 390, 392 

green 208; hair 49^250 

251 ; manes 357, S^-f 

l^er 64, 266, 268, 325 

sandal 252 ; water 327 
Red Sea trad. 96, 102, 106, 

157, 235, 240, 390, 394 
Redeemed punishments 379 
Reform of writing 86 
Regents of Space 131, 135 
Regularity avoided 339, 379 
Rekem, Ailana, 243, 245, 

390 
Relatives destroyed 132 
Religion Ch. 135, 362 
Rent in heavens 175, 349 
Repetition of events 10, 379 
Reskem Daria 313 
Res-mehit-ba 283 
Revolving sky 341 
Rhinoceros 240, 252, 394 

ear - haired, India, 182 

Assyria 182; in Ch. 183-4 

hides 184 ; symbol 184 

s. horns 
Rice 374 
Richis, Sien, 197, 387, 107, 

109 
Rig Veda 173. 174 
Right hand side 20, 380 
Rimaku 22 
Ring money 35, 78. *119. 

352. 383 
Rings Jade 32. 379, 381 
River : boating 115 ; god 

90 ; sacrifice 90, 381. 386 
Roads, god, 215 
Rock crystal, s. Crystal 
Rofia palm 170 
Roman Empire : name 242, 

244 ; trad. inCh. 244, 395 ; 

Ceylon 251 ; Seres in 393 
Roof : tiling 382 ; importance 

379 
Rope : foreign 192, 388 ; 

asbestos 1S7 
Routes, Trade : difficult 65, 

308 ; long-lived 53 ; south- 
west 249-253; Jade traffic 

309 ; by : Badakshan 225, 
308 ; Burma to Szetchuen 
64 ; Ceylon to Ch. 251 : 
Ferghana 308 ; Han- 
tchung to Lan - tchou 
367 ; Herat to Ch. 2()8, 
311 ; India, Indo - China 
67 : India to Szetchuen, 



64, 65: Kashgar 308: 
Khotan 50 ; Kiang 61, 66, 
219, 249; Kungtchang to 
Szetchuen 330 ; Ling ling 
370 ; Lin tao 213, 214, 
215, 219 ; Min-tchou, 
Sung-pan-ting 215 ; Nan 
Shan 308 : Ningyuen 40 ; 
North 249 ; Pamir 308, 
312, 321 : Patna 50, 51, 
197: Pehshan 249, 308; 
Shan Burma 253 ; Shensi- 
Pegu 55, 64 : Shuh 60, 61 ; 
Sining to Min-tchou 215 : 
Sung-pan-ting 218. 384 ; 
Tatsien lu 50 ; Ta - yao 
40, 255 : Tai-yuen 331 ; 
Tchengtu 40 ; Tung-King 
to Szetchuen 64, 65 ; Tsih- 
shih 66; Ts'in-Shuh 199 ; 
Tsung-ling 308 ; Yarkund 
308 ; Yemtsai 309 ; Yung- 
tchang 56 

Routinism 139 

Royal boat 361 

Royalty weak 69, 70 

Rubies 309, 318, 365 

Rude mercantile writing 199 

Rukh 169 



Saba. Sheba. Queen of 35, 

264 
Sabaeans 240 ; colonies 97, 

99. 102, 103 
Saba2o-Phoenicians 157 
Sabbath 12, 378 
Sacoe, Sak 100, 359 
Sacrifice first, 320, 328, v. 

Girls. Human, Horses 
Sada 251 
Saddles 386 
Sadin, not Sindu 104 
Safar, Zabai 92 
Safflower 220. 229. 391 
Sailors' yarns 107, 114, 168, 

170 
Sakwala Cosmogony 174 
Salamander 188 
Salar. Turks, 311 
Salmanazzar 182 
Salomon 39, 99. 102, 234, 

243 
Salt 318 

Saltpetre 369, 392 
Sambac 182, 234, 389 
San-fen 128, 140, 143 ; she- 

p'an 347: shou 75 
Sand rats 270-1 
Sandalwood 99, 252 
Sandals 379 
Sanf 240, 242 



ALPHABETICAL INDKX. 



411 



Sangani 297 

Sangar.T 2(j0 

Sangir 2t)2 

Sapta-sindu 97 

Sapy straits ISl, v. HfiG 

Sargon-Shennung 26, H18, 
320. :i72, aso 

Sari 23 

Saribas-Dayaks 168 

Sankara 234 

Sarmatia 216 

Sassanides 82 

Saurashtra Mandala247, 395 

Savul 168 

Sawing fire 168 

Scientific expedition 261-2 

Screens 843 

Sculls, double 385 

Scythian bow 194 

Se or Sze, tr 61, 359 ; Ming 
162 ; Tche 325 ; yep or 
yip 213; yoh 347, v. Four 
Mountains 

Sea, arrival 69, *354. 329 ; 
going vessels 102, lU5, 
259, 260, 390; hunters of 
Tats' in 2-15 ; oxen 329 ; 
traders, 37, 96, 107 ; change 
91, 156-8, 239-41, 366. 387- 
92 

Seal, character 88, v. Tchuen; 
seals personal 11, 343, 379 ; 
ribbons 221, 393 

Seasons, four, 9. 378 

Seed-pearls 180 

Sekiz-jolduz 289 

Self-growth 292, intr. 

Semi-animals 387 

Semi-ideographic 15, 87, 380 

Semitic works 10, 90, 317, v. 
months 

Sennacherib, fleet 101. 102, 
105, 359, 385 

Sera, Serica, Seres. 51. 222. 
224, 226, 227, 251 ; yellow, 
east, 22t')-7, 393; red haired, 
V. Kunmi ; at Samos 3G9, 
393 ; and Sinae 255 

Sesamum 180, 182. 229. 231, 
386, 391 

Sesatai 166 

Sesostris 76, 183 

Setaria 374-5 

Seven days 9, 12, 38, 378; 
directors, 374 ; kings 146 ; 
month 7th day 302 ; musi- 
cal notes 394 

76 year cycle 368, 391 

Sexagenary cycle 10, 78, 378 

Sha-Hia 321 ; Kiu 221, 308 

Shaduff 118, 119-20, 191. 386 

Shah Rukh 313 



Shalmanazar II. 97 
■^Shamanism 147, 374 
<; Shamans, Sramans 210, 

207b, 208 1, 209b 
Shan, not Tan, st. 59. 252-3, 

395 : jugglers 59 ; Burmese 

rante 253 
Shan-hai King iarl81>, 192, 

346, Hu 23.5; Kiang 24*? ; 

Kin Kiun 332 
Shang dyn., Shang-yn 5, 30, 

69, 140, 143, 150, 170, 1H3, 

190, 382 ; Ritual 149, 208 ; 

in Sung 74, 140, 143 
Shang-kiu 382 ; Kiun 205 ; 

Lin Park 230, 390; Tai 

Mon s.v. ; Wu-ting s.v. 
Shang-ti 20, 21, 139, 380 
Shantung : foreign traders 

36, 78, 89, '.»1, 96, 103, 107, 

l.">6-7-8, 168, 170. 173, 365, 

38.5-6-7 
Shao-Hao 46, 95. 141, 143, 

316, 328, 331-6, 34;,* 353. 

3611, 381 
Shao-hien 329. 331. oflg. 214 
Sheb 281 
Shebat 94, 358 
Sheep 380 
Sheh-ti-K'oh 93 
She Huang-ti 132-3, 152, 172. 

203. 20.5, 207b. 208b, 236. 

389 ; Neo Taoist 149, 204, 

200 
She Ki, pass., deficient 317 
Shell-cups 252 
She-Io, Sila 174, 175. 207b. 

365. 388 ; Yh 287 
Shen 348 ; Shen 308 ; Tse 

214 ; Tsing 237 ; Tu 174 ; 

Yu 254 
Shensi-Pegu route 55, 64 
Sheng-tu 114 
Shennaar-Singar 27 
Shennung-Sargon. v. Sargon 
Shennung-hwang-tchih 319 
Sheshonk 194 
Shi 383 
Shifting of capital. 

cardinal points, s.v. 

poria, V. changes 
Shih-hu 261, 284 ; 

Hwang 215 ; Shen 

298 ; Tan 368, 369 
Shin-Tsung 377 ; Tub 60. 

61 ; Yoh 197 
Shindu cloth 119 
Shining at night 179 
Ships : battle 115 ; red. 180 ; 

Funam 115. 116 ; Indian 

260, V. ^ea-going vessels, 

Navy 



s.v. ; 
em- 
Liu 

287. 



Shiraz 189 

Shoes 370, v. boots 

Shooting stars : myths 302. 

371, cf. 289 
Shora 369 
Shou of Shang 184 ; Mi 38. 

41, 97, 117, 255, 352, 384 ; 

Shan 333 ; Sin 36? 
Shouldered Celts 374 
Shu 95 ; Drum 208 ; Ban 

299 ; Sha 275 ; Shan 318 ; 

Shuk 329 
Shu King 5, 139, 140, 363, 

pass. 
Shuh history 51, .52, 120,* 

196, 237, 387 ; conquered 

54. 354; articles 50, 65, 

219 ; traders 46, 48. 50. 55, 

61. 77, 117,* 197, 198, 207, 

V. Routes 
Shuh-Han. dyn 67 ; Yao 276 ; 

Ki 333-6 
Shwe-Dagon 66 
Shui Kia'45 ; King 346 
Shun of Yii. a native 5, 141, 

143, 144, 195, 265, 287, 335 ; 

in Tchen 141 
Shun-ho, Shou. Wi, 358; 

Wei 223 ; Yii Kwan 149 
Shwoh-wen 208, pass. 
Si : rhin. 184 ; Fan 299 ; Hu 

269 ; Kiun 293 ; Shi 262 ; 

Wang Mu, s v. 
Si Yii 229 ; gov. gen. 221-2, 

225, 393-5 
Slang 185 ; Ki 366 ; Kiun 188. 

236, 370 : Wang of Tsu 

179 
Siao-Shih 369 ; Tchuen 88, 

205 ; Yuan 225 
Siberia, Ass. Bab. 14 ; in- 
scriptions 338 
Sidonians 102 
Sieh 5. 30 
Sien 173, 196; jen tchang 

270; Pi 176; Shing 107; 

tch'uei 161 
Sih-Schi 371 
Sila, v. She-lo 
Silence, western 314 
Silk : cloth 200, 204. 374; 

districts 367 ; stuff 200 ; 

trade 244 ; worms 196, 200 
Silky amianthus 187 
Silver 85, 87, 204, 252, 318. 

379. 384 ; mines 199. 255 
Simen Pao 90, 94 
Simple char. 198 
Simurgh 169 
Sin-Yuen-Ping 218 
Sindhn, not Sindu. 101 ; 

cloth 104, 200-1 



i 



412 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



Sing, name, 24, S03, 306 ; Kia 

307 ; Ki 92 ; Su hai 223 
Singhalese traders with Ch. 

251 
Sinim, not Chinese, *i8 
Sining 215, v. Routes 
Sirius 298, 340 
Sirpurra 307-8 
Sistrum 344, 387 
Siu-fuh 115, 210, 221, 367; 

Hi 95 
Siuen of Tchou 184 ; of Ts'i 

174 
Siuh 93, V. lunar Mansions 
Siiin, sacrifice, 132-138. 362 
Siun-ki 289 
Six, div. of time. 339 : periods 

69 ; states 145, 148 ; stores 

81 ; Tsung 20, 26. 81, 348. 

349 
Sixty, cycle, 10, 78, 378 
Skin, boats, 11, 114, v. cora- 
cles ; writing 169. 171, 386 ; 

of iguana 204, 208 
Skull, deformed, 307, 318, 

324, 377 
Sky, figure of earth, 378 ; a 

vault 10, 341, 378 ; earth, 

water, gods, 173 : Heaven, 

cult., 20, 377 
Skylax 157-159 
Slavery 384 
Small ; 18 States 218 
Sockets of doors 379 
Socotra 230, 231, 392 ; cf. 

Mi-sung 
Sofala 99 

Sogdiana, Ch.. 314 
Solanum Melangenum 269 
Solar, distance, 366 ; year 9, 

378 
Soma, Tze-mai, 107. 109, 

110. 173, 210, 386-7 
Somali coast 96 
Son of Heaven 151, 377 
Sona and Utara 57 
Soothsayer 2()7b 
Sorcery 89, 92. 385 
Soul, double. 348, 380 ; triple 

348 
.South, A96ka, char., 198 ; 

Arabia 80 ; 15urma 59 
South pointing boat 261, 

285 ; chariot 45. 288-6 
South regions and Ts'u 234 ; 

west trade 119 
Soy beans 374 
So-yep, Sui-yep, 215 
Spica 302, 340 
Spices, precious, 369, 392 
Spinning 374 ; damsel 301-2 ; 

V. cowherd 



Spirits worship, 139. 2n8b. 
280, 329, 374 ; of furnace 
161 ; awe of 292 ; bringing 
down the 386 ; dispeller 
of 386 
Spirituous beverage 374, 375 

Spoked wheels 379 

Sramans, first, 174, 234 

Staffs 333 ; royal 379 ; walk- 
ing 379 

Stamping : bricks 342. 379 ; 
coins 104. 118, 156, 385; 
ingots 191, 386 

Standard measures and 
weights 10. s.v. 

Starry animals, v. quad- 
rants ; beast 129 

Stars, Eab., Ch., 298, 300, 
302, 340, 383 ; catalogued 
286, 287 ; gazing 374 ; 
Tartar 289 ; star - points 
24, 10, 12, 24. 378 ; also 
V Lunar Mansions, Astro- 
nomy 

State diviner 92 ; seal 204, 
207 

Stations at Sea 388, 235 ; v. 
Fairy isl. 

Statues 211, 214. 220, 333, 
362 

Steel, natural, 374 ; and 
silex, V. Fire 

Stems, ten, 340 

Stitched boats 260 

Stone ; age 24. 295, 371, 374 ; 
bird 131 ; classics 17 ; 
coloured 349 ; coal 368, 
:^91 ; heads 374 ; oxen 199 ; 
sculptures 36, 38. 44 ; 
tower, 51, 222, 312 ; wicks 
187 ; wig 354 

Stools 379 

Storax 369. 394 

Storm bird 158-9, 170, 387 

Straits, v. Malacca, Sunda, 
Bali, Alias 

Striped cloth 201 

Su-hoh 3.59, 394: Jen 138; 
Lih 308 ; tchou 158 ; Ts'in 
149, 176, 207 

Suh-kiii 262 ; Shin 31 ; Teh 
311 

Sugar 182; drug 234. 236; 
cane 236 ; of cane 2:33, 234, 
389, 392 ; of palm 233, 366. 
;388 

Sui dyn. 215 ; tr. 61 ; fire 
166 ; Ho 204 ; Jen 162 ; 
Min 138 

Sulla Annap 378 

Sulphur 213, 215-6, 368, v. 
Brimstone 



Sulphurous gas 272 
Sumatra 238, 255; N. 110; 

N.W. 235; S.E. 108 ; Java 

38. 113. 297 
Sumbawa 113. 181 
Sumbul. 235 
Sumero'-Akkadian 22, 96, 98. 

V. Akkaian 
Sumeru 173, 387 
Sun, bird 193, 217, 388 ; male 

378 ; mirror 168 ; stopped - 

218 ; mock v. Parhelion 1 
Sun-K'ing 149, 204. 207; '' 

Kwang 218 ; Shuh ngao 

118; Wu 164-6 
Sunda isl. 188. 236. *352, 

366; straits 111, 113, 181, 

261 
Sundering of the earth 175 
Sundial 277-9 
Sung 90. 92, 94, 133-4, 140, 

146, 166-9 ; kia 305 ; pant- jj 

ing 215, 219, 229, 30U, 1^85 ;' I 

Wu ki 149, 207b, 218; 

yung 310 
Sunrise, day 99 
Suppressed texts 363 
Surnames, first 303 
Survey, v. Yii kung ; of Ts'u 

192 
Susa, Susiana. civil. 21, 22, 

26, 83, 318, v. Elam 
Susu, se 182 

Sutra in 42 sect., 209b, 213 J 
Suttism 132-3, 135, ;S62 '% 

Suvanna Bhumi 57 
Suy r. 134 

Swallow, prefect 354 
Swan-pan 13 
Sweet-flag 236, 246, 391 ; tree 

233 
Swords 166, 167. 204, 379; 

iron 207, 382 ; famous 207 
Syllabaries 16, 129, 380 
Symbolism stretched 295-6 
Syria 102. 104 

Sze, rhinoc 179, 184; lo 58 
Szema-Kuang 317 ; Siang ju 

2:30, 247. 250, 254; Tsien 

211, 317, pass. ; pin 58, 

tao 58 ; Tchou 86 ; Tchuen, 

v. Shuh, and Routes ; yoh, 

V. Four Mountains 



Ta-Hia 50 219. 275-6. 3:30; 
Hung 319, 323-4; jen 114; 
Kwei 329 ; shik 211 ; tch- 
uen 88 

Ta-ts'in 55-58, 122, 222, 235 ; 
muddle 55, 58. 276; sea- 
hunters 245 ; Tarshish 182, 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



413 



1^7. 243-4. :^90. 392. 395; 

traders 240, 242, 2o2 
Ta-Tsu 345 ; yao 255 ; yh 

113 ; yuan-laon 219, 220. 

221, 309 
Taas i-9 
Tablets, city of 196; and 

tripod 332. 378 
Tabu-ing names 30, 74, 79, 

21(3. 365 
Tadpole char 20. 345 
Tad-svad-kama 123 
Tagaung 56. 59. 117, 216, 385 
Tagh Dumkash valley 312 
Tai, towers 11. 343, 379 
Tai Shans 190 
Tai Kung Wang of Ts'i 171, 

172, 183 ; Ho 156. 172 
Tai-lu, Tai-yuen 334 
Tai-mou of Shang 73, 74, 76, 

265. 275, 286. 355, 382 
Tai-ngo 204; yu 107, 109; 

yuen 331 route 
Takla-Makan 310 
Tall men 314 
Tamburah 222. 393 
Tambourine 380 
Tamdin 22 

Tamerlan. tombstone 313 
Tan 367 ; v. Cinnabar ; erh 

115. 124 : fu 278 ; kiu 328, 

333, 381 ; tchi 33 ; tchou 

110 
Tan 196 
Tang 334; Mei 287; Sien 

319 ; Tien 324 ; fu 138 
Tao 334, 375 ; the 122, 125 ; 

of Huangti 327 ; and Tang 

336 
Tao-sze-ism 95, 145, 147, 

217 cradleland 
Tao-sze-ists 91. 169, 173 
Tao-teh-king 91, 120-1-2-3-4 
Tao-t'iet 71 
Taoism 95, 138, 147 
Taoists 148-9, preservers 

141 ; Books 367 
Taphussa, Bhallika 56, 387 
Tapi 79 

Tapirs 252, 394 
Taprobane 58, 261 
Tarshish navy 99, 243, 245 
Tartar influence 131-2-3, 207. 

215. 284-5, 385 
Tarym r. 4, 267, 309 
Tash kurgan 312 
Tatsienlu, Route 50, 197 
Tattooing 328. 374, 379 
Tchai-Hng 220 
Tchaispaish, Teispes 157 
Tcham 240, 392 
Tchampa 242 



Tchang, flagrant 384 ; Heng 
284 

Tchang-Kien 50. 62, 200 ; 
two journeys 219 ; dates 
253 ; Assistants 219-22, 
230 ; report 249 ; in Tsen 
250 ; 390, 391 

Tchang-ku 328 ; kung 269 ; 
lo 23I ; pu 246, 8, 330 ; y 
46, 52, 149. 325. 31^0, 
332 

Tch'ang Hwang 91, 96; 
hung 287 ; teh 189 

Tchan-tan 252 

Tchao 146. 149. 179, 287. 
304 ; After 261, 284 ; 
Hwang-hou 250 ; Siang 
Wang 203 ; to 62. 233-4- 
5-6-7. 241, 390; Wang 
384 ; of Tchou 184 : of 
Yen 174, 180, 365; Yun 
325 

Tche-pu. Java 189 ; tsiang 
233 

Tchehkiang 107 

Tcheh-kwan 196 ; M*ih 92 

Tch'eh-fu 266-9 

Tch'en 145; fob 287 

Tcheng st. 90. 92-3. 146, 149. 
152, 162, 167, 170 ; hiuen 
93 ; hung 370 ; Mao 208 ; 
peh kias 149, 207b 

Tcheng or Tching ; Tang 
169, 170; tu_54, 196, v. 
Shuh, routes ; Wang 31, 
38, 43, 51, 169, 186, 208, 
2.55, 352, 357 

Tchi-gur 355 ; Kia-hua 190, 
235, 246, v. Hunna 

Tchi-yu, or vu 318, 319. 323- 
4, 329, 3:^0-7, 350; anc. 
Tchi-vu 323 ; yu-ki 337 

Tchih r. 266 ; Wu 266 

Tchinani 368 

Tchinapati 368 

Tchoh-lu 329, 331-2 

Tchou 30, 91, 95, 115, 120 
141, 151,183,283,350,382 
East 70, 89. 177, 385 
West 69, 383 ; origin 77, 
310, 355, 383, v. Shang 
199 ; late weakuess 146, 
190 

Tchou Kung 31, 43, 146, 151, 
278, 283 ; Siuen. Wang 86 ; 
y Wang 46 

Tchou. boat 262; Kwan 
145 ; Li 146. 150. 175 ; 
Ling 95 ; Mi 38 ; pei or-pi 
179, 278. 366. 387 ; shu 
38 ; sin 33 

Tchu. of Hia 366; hi 162; 



ju 115 ; Ko Hang 63 ; nio 
358; po 24U-1. 255; she 
196; Siang 323;8, 374; 
tchung 183, 234; Wen of 
134 ; yai 115, 124.240.366. 
390 ; yng 261 ; Fahlan 
215.6 

Tchuang or Tchwang. of 
Ts'u 118, 184, 190; Lao 
148 ; tchou, or tze 91, 95, 
118. 133, 136, 149, 153, 

• 168, 170, pass. 

Tchuen. boat 252 ; style 88. 
198. 205. 338 

Tchuen, or Tchuan, or 
Tchwan-hiuh 95, 140, 141, 
143, 148, 190, 192, 269, 286, 
288, 316, 329, 330-4, 3.^6, 
347. 353, 381 ; calendar 81 

Tchun-tsiu 139, 143, 363 

Tchuh, priests 141; lu 319; 
lin 266 ; yung 161-2 

Tchuktchis 393 

Tchung-erh 121 ; Kia 306 ; 
Li 161, 286, 289. 334 ; 
Tyng-li 381 ; shan 266, 
268-9, 325-7; shang 149, 
211 

Teak wood 96 98, 101, 359 

Teeth lacquered 361 ; v. 
Black teeth 

Teh-Hien 317 

Teks, Red 161, 161, 162; 
White 326 

Temir Kazuks 289 

Tempering iron 79. 81. *86, 
90. 167, 386 

Ten : celestial bodies 339 ; 
days 378 ; Hwei 339 ; Ki 
23, *348. 387; Ministers 
319, 347 ; months 24, 319 ; 
names, cycle, 90, 387 ; 
Patriarchs 340 ; suns 339 

Terrestrial kings 33, 348, 365 

Thatun. Sadun. 57 

Thaumaturgists 218 

Thein-ni 67 ; cf. Thinai 

Thimble. Archer's. 195, 264, 
379, 381 

Thinai 51, 68 

33 demigods 173-5, 348, 365 ; 
kings 365. 387 ; Ratus 365 

36 St., Turkestan. 393 

3 fairy isl. 206. s.v. ; legged 
bird 193. 217, 388 

300 winters 323 ; years 322 

376 officials 373 

Thuc 236 

Ti, divine, IgO ; tr. 61 ; white 
328 ; Kiang 76, 333 ; Kuh- 
kao-sin 334, 336, 381. 396 ; 
Ti Tchih 143. 334, 396 



414 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



Tiao-tchi, or Ti, 55, 58, 227, 

366 
Tiawat. Tiamat, 127 
Tibet I'i, 114, 344 ; bricks 

13 ; fire 13 ; mastiffs 197 
Tieh, tiet, 85, 382, v Iron; 

mt. 266, 269 
Tien, dyn. of Ts'i, 159, 171 ; 
Ho 156 ; Ping T'ien-tze 
149 ; Tsen 67 ; Yueh 56, 
62, 66 
T'ien, heavens, 20-1 ; Huang 
Ta Ti 300 ; Tchang 159 ; 
Tdhu, err. for Tsen-tu, 172, 
247-8; T'o 54; Tze 150, 
319, 377 ; Ts'in 299 Ts'ing 
270 
Tigers 184 

Tiglath-Pileser 100, 278 
Tigris 102, 319 
Timor 366, 390 
Tin 85, 86, 265, 354, 379, 
394 ; Meshed 318, 322 ; 
Peh-lu 55, s.v. ; powder 
213, 222, 390 ; Yiit for 
Tsen-yut 66 
Tinning mirrors 216 
Tishtrya 350 
Tithes. Ch. rulers. 150 
T'o 208 
Toad, red, 163 
Tokhari 53 

Tombs, horseshoe 119, 191 
386 ; vaults 379 ; v. Deads 
Toothpicks 328. 831 
Torguths 311 

Tortoise, Avatar 173 : mt. 
274 ; shell 92. 244 ; scorch- 
ed 377 
T'ou 236 ; Tou-hien 215 
Towers. Astron. 11, 343, 

379 
Town-gates 355, 379 
Tong-ti-jen 115 or Tung-ti- 

jen 
Tong-King or Tung-King v. 
Nhitnam, Nan-yueh, Kat- 
tigara 
Trade ; profit 244 ; routes 
30. s.v.. N. E. 321, S.W. 
48, 394, Turkestan 320 ; 
unnoticed 314 
Traditions and legends 377. 

380 
Transformation 208b, 214 
Transmogrified Notions 33 
Transmutation 89, 214, 390 
Transplantation 230, 246, 

391 
Transhipments 388 
Trappag.x 260 
Travellers on Pamir 312 



Travelling Merchants 314, 

cf. Shuh, &c. 
Tree of Life 24, 387, *349 
Trieu 236 
Trigonometry 183 
Triple Walled 314 
Tripod and Tablets 332, 378 
Trisula 197 
Trung-trac 260 
Tsab Mandas 317, 319 
Tsai 138, 145-6 ; Ki 317 ; 

Kia 305 
Tsampenago 56 
Tsan 300-1 ; Tsung 196 
Tsang-hieh or Kieh, Dungi 

5, 7. 24, 27, 318. 377 
Tsang-ko 65 : lung 358 ; wu 

208 
Ts'ao 145 ; Jungs 333, 336 ; 
ling 134, 137 ; nu 266 ; 
shin 161, 163 
Tse, not Tze 12, 94, 358, 

385 
Tsen, St. 39, 52. 61-3, 191. 
209b, 233, 388 ; routes 63, 
191 ; stops 250 ; China's 
names 63, 91, 354; exp. in 
Burma 56. 60. 63. 191, 
250, 388 ; not T'ien 67 ; 
Yueh 56, 61. 62 
Tsen-pho 63 ; Tang Kiang 

62 ; tchen 67 
Tseng 134 

Ts'i, St. 146, 148-9. 155, 156, 
159, 172. 214. 218 ; Hiai 
book 170 ; Siuen, W. 108, 
170 ; Wei, W. 108, 110 
Tsiang Kiu-ju 160-1 
Tsie-lan 58 
Tsieh 24, 339 

Tsien, r 196, 199 ; Li 204. 
207 ; shan 196 ; Sing Tze 
246 
Tsih-Moh 36, 89, 92. 106. 
107, 109, 118, 134, 137, 
147, 156, 158 , ruined 178, 
206, 364, 385 
Tsih-shih 66 ; Tsao 390 
Tsin 188 ; former 187 ; W. 

261 ; Hou 284 ; Wen 160 
Ts'in, St. 51, 55, 57, 60, 77, 
92, 95, 115, 131, 133, 145. 
146, 162; Empire 203; 
Than-Tan. 51. 55, 57, 244, 
246 ; not China 63. 64. 66. 
67, 68, 193, 207; books 
saved 205; and Han 210; 
Hiao Kung 149 ; Hwei, or 
Hwuy Wang, 52 Muh 
Kung 133, s. v.; SheHwang- 
ti, s.v. ; and Shuh 199, 354 ; 
westwards 207, 213, 388 



Tsing-ling 52, 54 ; Muh 252 ; 

Yang 328 
Tsiu-Kiu 268, 271; Ni 213, 

215 
Tso-Kiu Ming 148, pass. ; 

Tch'ih 333 
Tsoh, Tsok 60, 61, 254 
Tsou-hien 149, 173, 174, 180, 

207. 207b 

.Tsu, Kia, 383 ; TchoiUU-..^ 

Ts'u, St. 5L U5, ai7?Q.18^ 

42tf, 134,(13&<^146, 149, 156. 

167, 207, 208; hist. 190, 

191, 287 ; Tchwang, W. 

118 ; Wei, W. .52, 55 . 

survey 171, 192, 346 ; Taic 

Shan 193 ; Tseru 51. 354 ; 

and India 170 ; Peh-yung 

197 ; Shuh 5i, 354 ; south 

191; Ts'in 179. 190; Wu 

186, 361 ; Yueh 178, 191 

Tsii Kwot 230 

Tsuan, Charat 198 ; Mu 235 ; 

Shin 161-2 
Tsung : six 20, 26. 81, 3i6,* 

348 ; Ling 308 
Tu. and Siu 384; kun 216 
T'u : kwei 277 ; Sui 236 ; 

Yu 52, 54, 196, 363, 387 
Tuh kiiih 225 
Tul-Barsip 102 
Tumuli, old 326, 337 
T'un-liu 210b 

valley 312, 382 v 
bronze; hai 179. 209b, 
233; hu 176, 366: kien 
kang muh 75, 76, 317; 
kien wai ki 317; king 44; 
ngou 233, 260-2, 299 ; yao 
92; ye, yeh 115, 179, 234, 
370, 388-9 ; yueh 233, 260 : 
yun 186 
Turfan, Tan-kiu 267, 333, 

383-4 
Turiva 231 

Turkestan 220, 250, pass. 
Turkoman horse 220, 224 
Turquoises 318 
Tusks 180, V, ivory 
Tusser silk 105, intr. 
Twelve, hours 279 , leaders 
20 ; months 9, Bab. 10, 
12. *93, *338, 385 ; notes 
340, 379; states 92. 380; 
Tse or Tze 94, 358, 385 ; 
years 10 ; zodiac 92-3-4, 
340-1, 350, 378 
24 year-parts or tsieh 9, 339, 
378 ; stellar points 340, 378 
Two fairy isl. 109, 111, 181 ; 

sosses 24, 380 
Tyr, Tyrians 102. 243 



Tung, 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



415 



Tze: kang l:?:^ ; kao 207b. 
210b ; kwei 19t5 ; mai, or 
wei 107, 109, 17H, 220 
shen 91 ; tch'an 152 
Tch'ang 91, 95: wei 287 
yang 170 

Tzen, or Tsen, tu, not Tien- 
tchu 246-7 



Uan-na-sha 311 
Ubua 105 
Udumi 100 
Ugro-Altaic 317 
Ukkalamandala 56, .387 
Uknu 34 
Ulai 105 
Ulgan 364 

Umbrellas, state. 379 
Unas, pyramid, 283 
Uncivilised immanence 373 
Undas Arman 378 
Unlucky ; days It), 379 ; 

words lU 
Unsuccess of Huangti 329 
Urba'u 22 
Urn burial 374 
Urnina 307 >r 

Ursa-major 286. 289. 374 ) 

minor 300 
Ur-sze for Ni-sze 227 
Uruk 22 

Usurtasen III,, 359 
Ut 364 



Vadjra 197 

Vases 379 ; Carved 180, 388 ; 

Copper 333 
Vasus, Eight 156, 171-2. 387 
Veda 166 
Veined Stone 188 
Vermilion 204 
Vernal Equinox, year 79. 

378 
Vertical Writing 15. 380 
Victims 137 
Vine 22S, 230, 379. 391 
Vitreous Ware 252. 394 
Vrihashpati 93, 94 



Wakhan, Kiii-su, 308, 324, 

o71, 381-2, 384 
Waksh, Oxus 371 
Walnut tree 225, 229, 391 
Wan 204; \Iin304; Sing 304 
Wang 150 ; Meng 76, 265, 

383 
Wang-Mu, Si, 32, 35, *264, 

266-7, 272-4, 325, 335, 365, 

381-4. 388 



Wang-shen 216 ; Sun Mwan 

6 ; Tclieng 203-4 : ti 196 
War, chariots 11, 344; for 

horses 220 
Washing the Weapons 342, 

379 
Water ; male 160 ; basins 

197 ; sweep 361, v.shaduff'; 

wheel 45, 120. 361 
Weak water 268, 327, 332 
Weaving ;i74 
Wedge 379 
Wei, St. 90, 94, 146-9, 162, 

179, 190. 287 ; Hwei W. 

149 ; and Tsin 301 ; of 

Tsi 173 
Wei. Northern 45, 187, 218 
Wei- Kan 119. 191-3,386; Ki 

366 ; tien 196 ; yen 171 
Weights and Measures 10, 

93; 378, 385 
Welding 375 
Wells 343. 379 
Wen, of Tsin 161 ; Shan 6C, ; 

Tsu 377 : tze 149, 152 ; 

Wang :30, 190 
West, char, for 5 ; trafic 309 
Western Civilisation 396 
Wheat 11, 379 
White, Ti 328, v. Five Tis ; 

Tiger 358 ; victims 80 
Wild silk 198, 200 
Wind, char. 15 ; S.W. demon 

72 ; sacrifices 138 
Winter, solstice 378 ; year 79 
Woman status 347, 380 
Wonderful 88, 91, 138, 147, 

166 
Wood, boats 114 ; figures 

134 ; scorched 374 
Woollen cloth 200-1 
Worships, new, 131-5 
Writing. Ch.; Origin 14, 15, 

18. 292. .380 V. Ku-wen ; 

Reform 86, 204. 185 ; and 

India 198 ; v. Hieroglyphs 
Writing ; Embryo 374 ; Dju- 

rtchen 198 ; on Skins 169 ; 

Lois 198 ; Shui Kia 198 ; 

Tsuan 198 
Wriggling Char. 192 
Written Tablets 332. 377; 

Texts 382 ; v. tripod 
Wu. St. 92, 145. 155. 158, 

162. 165. pass. 
Wu-hao 360 ; heng 82 ; Hien 

or Mokan 74. 76. 286. 289, 

298, 355, 371. 382 ; hwan 
191 ; Kiang of 
ley or luy 221, 



176 ; Ki 
Yueh 178 
•225, 393 ; 
176 



ling of Tchao 



Wu-SUns 15, 2I8, 232, 224 , 

230-1, 2.50, 254, 391, 393 ; 
tchu 236, 389 ; tien 128, 
140; Ting 73. 383 ; tou 
365; tu 213-4,2:34; Wang 
115. 146, 149. 190, 384; 
y 268 



Y tr. 75 ; Mou 195 ; Tsu 

377 ; Tsun Kou 211, 222, 

393 ; Yn 275-6 
Ya, Tchou, 40, 61 
Yah 314 ; Yii, or Ya-yuh, 329, 

332 
Yak 100 

Yakut 179, 182, 365, 387-8 
Yang ; barrier 308 ; r. 266 ; 

Kiah 383 ; kwuh 273 ; 

mirror 167, 364 ; Tze 

Kiang. crossed, 193, 384 ; 

mouths 158, 178. 190 ; 

Tchu 149, 152; Yh 156 
Yao, or Ti-yao, 141, 143, 144, 

237, 334-5 ; Ki-Tchou 141 ; 

and Shun 6, 114, r4t)-l, 

169, 335 
Yao 252. v. Ta-Yao ; hills 

326; potters 375; Jen 530; 

Min 325; Shui Kia 198; 

Tchi 266 
Yaon, Ferghana, 391 
Yarkand. route, 3 08, 393; 

Daria 309, 313 
Yavnai 105 
Yazatas 83 
Ye-Kwang 179, 180, 204 ; 

Lang 62, 193; Si-Ming 234 
Year, divisions 9, 378 ; great 

11 ; name 13 ; solar 378 ; 

ten months 24, 319 ; vernal 

equinox 79 ; winter solstice 

79 
Yeast 383 

Yeh 90, 94, 261, 285 
Yellow r 5 ; fingered 181-2, 

246, 389, V. Hwang-Tchi ; 

rats 188, 266-7 
Yemen 99 

Yem-Tsai 309, 311, 224 
Yen, of Tsin, 92; mt. 266 ; 

nat. 184 ; st. 146, 14S, 174, 

176, 180, 207b. 218, 388 ; 

Tchao W. 108, 149 ; Hwo- 

Shan 272, 327 ; Ki, Kara- 

shar. 212, 222, 309, 384; 

Ling 191 ; Tou 115 ; Tze- 

Shan 269 
Yenissei 5, 383 
Yh-King 16, 30. 147, 151, 

345 ; Shou 106 ; Tchou 41, 

63, 115, 369 



416 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 



Yn dyn. 115, v. Shang- 

Yn 
Yn and Yang 10, 125. 148. 

1C5, 174. *338, 350, 384 
Yn-han 266 ; Kao 287 ; T'ang 

17'* 
Yng-ling 156 ; Lung 319 ; 

Tchou 107-9 
Yoke 379 ; of heavens 300 ; 

of horses 381 
Youi 119 

You-yu 207, 211. 386 
Yii the Great 32, 169, in- 

script. 192, 195 ; st. 335 ; 
«- Hjung 190 ; Hwang 361 ; 

Kiang 109, 173; Kung 6, 

33, 180, 186, 190, 192; Lo 

58 ; Men 308, 310 ; She 33 ; 

Siang 186 ; Tchang 115 ; 

Wei 52. 196 ; Y 110, 196 
Yu-Hu 333, 336 ; Kiu-li 225 ; 

Kwei 333. 336 ; Nai Hwang, 

ti 27, 88, 127, 150, 319, 328 



V. Hwangti ; Shan 


327 ; 


Sin 333-4, 336 ; Siuh 


246; 


Yii 207 




Yuan-Yaon 221, 392; 


Kiii 


208b 




Yueh. St. 92, 107. 155-6 


158, 


165, 178-9, 218, 262,* 


357, 


360, 387 ; mariners 


112, 


115, 260, 262; and 


Wu 



182 
Yueh-pan, Sol-pan 215-16 ; 

Shang 31, 43-4, 46.384, 393 ; 

Wang 193; Sui, or Hi 61, 

344 ; Ti 50, 60. 218, 223, 

250, 269. 275-6. 369, 392- 

394 
Yuen-Kiao 107, 109, 114 ; 

Kiu 236 ; Ling 140 
Yiih-heng 289 
Yulduz, plateau 273, 276, 

284 
Yun-lei-wen 72 ; Shuh 1 10 



Yunnan 56 ; Jade 34 ; Jadeite 

41 ; Pegu 389 
Yung 137, 208b ; tr. 19!* ; 

Kiu, Greek 225 ; Shing 

266 ; Tchang 39. 253. 394 ; 

Tcheng 329 
Yiis 304 



Zab r. 319 

Zabai 240, 242. 246. 392, 393 
Zafar 100. 109 
Zejan-jolduz 289 
Zend-Avesta 164, 166. 323, 

350, 365 
Ziggurats 343 
Zikura 129 
Zikuv 127, 129 
Zodiac 92, 93. 94. 340-1, 350 
Zodiacal names 378. 385 ; 

stars 286. 334 
Zoroastrism 157 



i 



i 



List of Important Errata. 



Page. Lnie. Read. 

10 23 ten Akkadian or cognate 

11 3 the notion that 

13 21 Wylie, N.,te>i 8(5. 

„ 28 diverged 3) those which 
have entered China 
through intermediary 
and later channels. 

14 1 63) Wheat . . . 
„ 13 TranH-Kaukasiache 

15 t) called Kii-tou 
U; 12 the Yh-Kimi 
17 7 which have 

20 4 country (yii kung, I, ii, 15) 
„• 27 that SluDi venerated 

21 5 p. 48(;) and 

21 23 Shaiuiti and Tien 

24 11 in 2285 B.C. 

2(j 8 that Kutchi or the like 

25 in 2285 B.C. 
27 22 n. 103. — Vigoureux, La 

Bible, iv, 463 
30 17 however reckoned as 

33 8 tchou and Liang- tchou 

34 4 Yung-tchang 
18 Bk. II, fol. 19 

„ 28 Jade of Turkestan 
36 12 having entered China in the 

„ 39 discovered, which, though 
40 20 of Switzerland 
45 9 Wei dynasty, cf. T. P. 752, 
7. The 

47 23 indegenoiis in China, and 

48 3 Shang-Yn dynasty 
„ n.218 Skull icang pen- Ki 

50 20 sent in 1S9 B.C. 

„ 24 Bactria in 12S B.C. 

,, 34 Tchang Kien 
52 6 circH 475 B.C. 
55 24-5 jLi-M<=^ parted ears 
57 n.275 afterwards, by Fah-hien 
60 last returned in 126 B.C. 

69 21 2 777 or better iSOi B.C. 

70 2 from Shensi to Tchihli 
,, 5 capital eastwards 

73 28 B.C. 1466 or better 1554 

B.C. 
29 B.C. 1269 or better 1331 
BC. 

74 3 a blank, and not 

75 4 about 243 B.C. 

„ 31 1845 or 1848 B.C. 

42 1710 or 1775 B.C. 

44 1596 or 1724 B.C. 
„ 47 1584 or 1712 B.C. 

48 1575 or 1686 B.C. 



11 
83 



Page. Line. Read. 
76 4 1557 or 1668 B.C. 
„ 5 1466 or 1554 B.C. 
„ 13 1450 or 1537 B.C. 
16 1414 or 1503 B.C. 
78 10 Chinese, does not seem to 
11 about 1091, not 1032 B.C. 
2 (irigines et leur 

85 13 B.C. 2282, arrival 

89 38 ideas of transformation but 

not of alchemy 

86 la branch 

90 24 time of drought 

92 36 have a song 

93 28 in China by 

94 13 in 655 (5, v, 9) 

100 n. 4201. 4 note 422. Mr. Houghton 
„ „ 5 the Hanuman of 

„ n.424 3 of Manu and the Fish 

101 n.425 6 pp. 125-6, and 

109 1. 1 (ought to be at the foot of 

the page) 
lt>9 n.453 1. 2 Sapphar metropolis 

„ n.456 „ Peng-la/ 
llOn.4671.8 (Bas. 2375-7896) 
,, ,, 11 or Barbarians in the 
South-East 
114 n.477 1. 9 Shan Hat King, 18, 5 
119n.4901.5 the Wei han 

120 1. 6 third century 

121 1. 22 Abhiraja 

131 title Fourth period : 770-481 

B.C. 
„ 1.15 in the west, in 986 B.C 
133 18 Daughter, an undescribed 
138 (paragraph) 155 (not 147) 

140 8 he retained and extolled 
143 n.589 1.3 p. 32 and 212 
143 n.599 1.2 of the Shang-Yn 

„ n.602 1.3 Kao-yang Tchuen hiiih 
145 title 481-221 B.C. 
151 1. 1 she Hwang-ti 
158 1. 35 since the previous 
160 .30 the teeth of the standing 

sacrificial 
161, 162, 163 have been misnumbered 

155, 156, 157 
166 n. 668, 1. 2 Kiv. 869, f. 5 c and 

Kiv.321,f. 1 
170 n. 692, 1. 7 13239-10157 Bas. 

187 n. 761, 1. 9 Reinaud 

188 n. 762, 1. 6 Sunda islands except 

Timor 

189 n. 772 Emerson Tennant 

193 n. 796, 1. 11 The Kassia forest 
204 1. 23 and gold and tin 



418 



LIST OF IMPORTANT ERRATA. 



Page. Line. Read. 

208, 1. 6 Han Wen-ti 

209, 1. 7, c 350 A.D. 

210 n. 888, 1. 2 Tchang-sha 
„ „ 1. 3 Kiu Kiang 

„ „ 1. 6 Liao-tuiig 

210* following pages numbered 207b, 

208b, 209b, 210b, 211 
222 20 marriage in 105 B.C. 

„ 21 came back bringing home 
246 1. 3 Fu-U gardens 
„ 1. 18 and Kan tniao 
282 n. 1219, 1. 1 Shway yoe 
284 1. 32 Shih-hu, third king 
312, n. 1291, 1. 12 Badakshan 
319 1. >) (paragraph) 345 

of the Tchao Yun 

and at Kang (Kin-tcheng 

or 
Pierced breasts 
1379 Ti Wami She Ki 



325 1. 25 
328 I. 22 



„ 1.30 
337 n 



Page. Line. Read. 

341 add. 47, 1, 4 p. 331 it must 

344 a. 69, 1. 7 Yueh-sui kiun 

788, 6 ; 65, 3 : 769, 1 
incidents, like those in 
the Lan-tsang Kiang 
of Kattigara with 
removed the Jungs to 
the Kilen Jiing>t 
Cf. Fang stih. 
by Dr. Spranger, 
made of 

separant...Ile de Bfdi 
560 (not 650) 
371, a. 1259, 1. 6 from China, cf.p.289 

374, 1. 23 cliffs, notched sticks 

375, 1. 5 of various sorts 

376, n. 1391, 1. 3 Miao Man huh tch; 
381, ^ 391 fo the Skang, c. 1954-1686 

B.C. 
386, 1. 7 fire god of the hearth 



1. 10 
349, a. 126, 1. 6 

353. a. 195. last 

354. a. 331, 1. 3 

356, a. 347, 1. 

357. a. 363, 1. 
396, 1. 
414, 1. 



359, a. 
359, a. 



4 
4 
4. 
2 



360, a. 
362, a. 



474. 1. 1 




T 



THIS BOOK IS DUE ON 

STA --- 



RBTURN TO dUk^A^ ^S£ 




^^-wa^-r/gg^ 




•i^^^^s^iisv' 



"-■^IBi^™.- 



YU iU4^ 




2)S 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 



