Digitized by the Internet Archive

in 2011 with funding from

University of Toronto

http://www.archive.org/details/gothicanglosaxoOOulfi

THE

GOTHIC AND ANGLO-SAXON

GOSPELS

WITH

THE VERSIONS

OF

WYCLIFFE AND TYNDALE.

'"'^

of Med/ae

LIBRARY "

'^^^OAonto, Ov^'^^'^

CAMPBELL
COLLECTION

a

x:\k.

/^ON-

^z c^

i

1

i-o

%

I- 6 fJ '^

.if 11^

THE

:

GOTHIC AND ANGLO-SAXON

GOSPELS

IN

PARALLEL COLUMNS

WITH

THE VERSIONS

OF

WYCLIFFE AND TYNDALE;

ARRANGED, WITH PREFACE AND NOTES,

BY

THE REV. JOSEPH BOSWORTH, D.D. F.R.S.F.S.A.

PROFESSOR OF ANGLO-SAXON, OXFORD ;

COEEESPONDING MEMBER OF THE EOTAL INSTITUTE OF THE NETHEELANDB

HONORARY P.E.S. OF SCIENCES, NORWAY: F.S.A. COPENHAGEN:

P. OF LIT. 8. LEYDEN, UTRECHT, ROTTERDAM, ETC.

ASSISTED BY

GEORGE WARING, ESQ., M.A.

OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND MAGDALEN HALL, OXFORD.

SECOND EDITION.

5£0nir0n:

JOHN RUSSELL SMITH, SOIIO SQUARE.

MDCCCLXXIV.

BT E. B. GARDNER, B. PICKARD HALL, AND J. D. BTACY,

PRINTERS TO THE UNIVERSITY.

PEEFACE.

i HE Scriptures contain the revelation of God^s will to man^—God^s
word addressed to all mankind. As the Scriptures are Truth_, the closer
we adhere to them, the nearer we are to Truth.
But the nearest ap-
proach we can make to the inspired originals, is in faithful translations,
as they express the sense with the greatest brevity and precision. Hence
good translations afford the best helps for obtaining a true knowledge of
the Scriptures, and different versions, by learned and religious men,
The same truths are there
must be the best and shortest commentaries.
expressed in different words. Where some are too brief and obscure,
others may be more full and clear, while together, being the same in
sense, they mutually illustrate and confirm each other.

These

of their day.

The present volume contains four translations of the Gospels.

translations were made by the leading men,—the intellectual aristocracy
The first version is the Gothic by Ulphilas, in the 4th
century. What vigour and decision of mind,—what a clear view of
the future extension and influence of the Germanic race, must Ulphilas
have had to induce him to translate the Scriptures into the vulgar
tongue of his people, in an age when Greek and Latin were the only
Ulphilas deeply felt, from
languages employed for literary purposes !
his own experience, that the power of the word of God to convince
the understanding and to influence the conduct would be limited, unless
it was not only preached, but read in the mother tongue, through which
the best affections of the heart are most easily touched.—These remarks

are equally applicable to the translation of the Gospels in the 8th or loth
century from the Vetus Italica into Anglo-Saxon, and to the Wycliffe
version of the whole Bible from the Vulgate into English in the i4ih
century, which was the dawn of that scriptural light that preceded
In the 1 6th century, Tyndale presented the Gospel
the Reformation.
in a still clearer light ])y his translation of the New Testament from

b

—

ii

PREFACE.

tlio ori<^iiml (jivek into Eiiglisl), so faillir»illy, that it is, in substance,
our present authorized Version, which constantly uses the same phrase-
ology and often employs the very same words.

These versions, extending^ from a.d. 360 to 1526, are not only of
great value to Divines, but deeply interesting to the philologist, who
is here supplied with ample specimens of the earliest German, and of
The first German comes
the Anglo-Saxon, as well as early English.
down to us in the translation of Ulphilas, made about a.d. 360. Though
the Anglo-Saxon Gospels were translated in 735 or before, and the
version printed in this volume is from a MS. written about a.d. 995,
yet we have an earlier record of Anglo-Saxon writing, in the Laws
From the Title of these Laws, we learn
of Ethelbei't, king of Kent.
that " they were established in the days of Augustine*,^'' that is,
between a.d. 597, when Ethelbert was baptised, and the death of
From this time
Augustine in 604.
to the present, we have our written Laws ; and we are told that
Bede, just before his death in 735, had finished the translation of
St. John^s Gospel into his native tongue, called English [Englisc] in
The Germans have the first written specimen of a
the early Laws.
Germanic language in LTlphilas, and we the next specimen in our
The English
Anglo-Saxon Laws, and at a later date in the Gospels.
philologist will now be able to trace many words and phrases from
the present time, 1865, to the translation of Tyndale in 1526, /)f
AVycliffe in 1389, of the Saxon about 995, and of the Gothic about
360, a space of more than 1500 years.
The Gothic is a language of
Low German originit, as well as the Anglo-Saxon and English, we
are, therefore, not surprised to find many phrases apparently identical
in Gothic, in Anglo-Saxon, and in modern English.

The most probable date is 599.

OoTnic.

]n bokum rsahno.
Ik im thata daur.

Langai wheilai.

Nauli leitila whcila.

AVIiis brothar.
Kaunio whaitci3.

Anglo-Saxon.

In the book of Psalms. On tham Scalnic. Lk. xx. 42.
I am the door.
For a long while.
Now a little while.
Whose brother.
A corn of wheat.

Ic com goat. Jn. x. 9.
Langre tide. Lk. xviii. 4.
Gyt suinc ln>'ilej. Jn. vii. ^^.
IIwcTS brother. Lk. xx. 28.

llwa'tcne corn. Jn. xii. 24.

I>.i (l('>in:».s, de .'Ehclbirlit cyning .<sette, on Augustinus daege.

Thorpc'» Aur',, ,,t Laws

and IntiiitMle*, 8vo. 18^0, vol. i. p. a.

+ Pnifi'-Hsor Max Miillcr'H Survey of Languages, 2nd Edn. 8vo. 1855, p. 63 ; and hia

ScitiKo of Language, Lecture V. p. 175.

+ Yet some while or time.

THE GOTHIC—ULPHIL AS.

iii

Gothic.

Hardness of heart.
Hardu-liairtei.
Hardu ist thata waurd. Hard is that word.
Sibun brothryus.
Wheitos swe suaiws.
Yuka auhsne.
Wha ist namo thein 1
Galeiks ist maun.

Seven brothers.
White as snow.
Yokes of oxen.
What is thy name 1
He is like a man.

Anglo-Saxon.

Heortan heardness. Mk. x. 5.
Heard is theos sprsec*. Jii. vi. 60.
Seofon ^ebrothru. Lk. xx, 29.
Swa hwite swa snaw. Mk. ix. 3,
An getfme oxenat. Lk. xiv. 19.
Hwset is th!n nama 1 Lk. viii. 30.
He ys geiic men. Lk. vi. 48.

THE GOTHIC translation of Ulphilas is the firsts in date and
importance^ which claims attention in a brief notice of these four
versions^ and of their celebrated translators.

The heathen Goths settled in Dacia_, on the north-west of the
While resident there they became
Black Sea^ at an early period.
Christians^ and before the Council of Nice in a.d. ^2^j the Christian
Goths were so numerous as to elect their own Bishop, Theophilus,
The most
whose signature appears in the records of that Council.
celebrated of their Bishops was Ulphilas J, born in a.d. 318 amoiigst
His eminent talents, learning, and benevolence
the Goths in Dacia.
gave him unbounded influence over his countrymen.
It, therefore,
became a proverb among the Goths, ^' Whatever is done by Ulphilas,
is well done.^''' This favourable impression prepares us to hear of his
consecration, at the age of 30, as Bishop § of the Goths in a.d. 348
by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia. He continued to discharge his
episcopal duties with great fidelity for forty years, and in a. d. 388
went to Constantinople to promote the interest of his Church, where
Ulphilas wrote in Latin, Greek, and Gothic,
he died at the age of 70.
and was full of energy in the practical application of his learning.
No difiiculty or literary labour deterred him when he had in view
the cherished desire of his heart, the translation of the New Testament
from the original Greek, and part of the Old from the Septuagint
into Gothic, that every one of his countrymen might read the word
• »f God in his own tongue.
It is most likely that this great literary
work was completed before a.d. 360; because, as a faithful and zealous
preacher of the Gospel, anxious for the instruction and edification of
the people, he had been accustomed to translate into their own language

• Hard Ih this Bpeech.

t lAlcrdllij A tuani of oxen.

* Some eminent Germana write the name UlfilaH, Ulfila, Wulfila, &c. Ah T have not
Soo

Boen th«3 name ho written in any ori^final docuniont, the old (jrtho/^'raphy \h retained.
otlicr rcaHofjH in Origin of Kng. and (JcTinanic Lang. vii. § 7, \\. 115, note *.
§ Waitz, Ueber da« Loben und die Lehro dcH Ulfila. 8vo. Hanover, 1840.

1)2

:

iv

PREFACE.

Ulphilas drew the
the passaj^cs of the Scrii)tures which he quoted.
water of life from the pure fountain, and delivered it to his people un-
eontaminated. He imbibed the doctrines of the Gospel at the fountain
head, the original Greek, and preached those doctrines to the Goths
in their own nervous and expressive Germanic tongue.

Ulphilas had always taken the greatest interest in the welfare of
AAlicn, in the year 376, he saw they w^ere grievously
the Goths.
oppressed by the Huns, he hesitated not to implore the protection of
the Emperor Yalens, and pleaded their cause with such success, that
Their innumerable tribes
the province of Mo'sia was assigned to them.
then passed over the Danube into Moesia, now Servia and Bulgaria
it was from the residence of these Visigoths, or West Goths in Mcesia
that they have been called Mceso- Goths, and their language !Ma}so-

Gothic.

Further, as a man of principle, he could not go.

Zealous Arians have always been anxious to claim Ulphilas, as
Yalens and his Arian bishops would naturally
belonging to them.
use all their influence with Ulphilas, and he would be disposed to
concede ae much as possible for the sake of peace and the w^elfarc of
In the
his people.
strife, contention, and bitter persecution of the times, it is difficult to
arrive at the exact truth. We know that Ulphilas was not only a
man of great learning, but of honest principles, and practical wisdom;
he was, therefore, with his cautious and judicious antecedents— his
early and extensive knowledge of the Scriptures—not very likely to
fall into fatal errors. We are certain of this, that so far as the trans-
lation of Ulphilas has been recovered, there is not a trace of Arianism to
be found. On the contrary, in passages clearly unfavourable to the doc-
trine of Arius, Ulphilas has honestly and plainly given the literal meaning
The chief point in which we are now concerned, is this,
of the Greek.
that those who read the Gothic version of Ulphilas are not likely to bo
This
led into error, as it is a faithful representation of the Greek.
was the opinion of the learned Junius and Dr. Marshall, the first
editors of the Gothic Gospels, and of Cardinal Mai, and the great
body of learned men in the past age, as well as the present.

Codox Argenteus. — We gladly leave this subject

to speak of the
])rincipal M8. and the chief editions of the Gothic Gospels.
The most ccle-
])rutcd MS. is The Codex Argenteu.s, or Silver Book, so called from being
transmitted to us in letters of a silvery luie, though the letters of a few
word* iu the beginning of each paragraph are in gold.

I once thought with

GOTHIC—CODEX AUGENTEUS.

v

Ihre, Meerman*, and others, that the words of this splendid Codex were not
written on the vellum, which is of a reddish purple colour, but that each word
was formed letter after letter by metallic characters heated, and then imjDressed
on silver or gold leaf which was made to adhere to the vellum by some
glutinous substance, in the manner that bookbinders now letter and ornament
the backs of books. On showing the facsimile to Henry Latham, Esq., M.A.,
of Brasenose College, and of the Oxford University Press, he observed the
letters were not so uniform as they would be if made by the impression of
metallic characters, and suggested that the form of each letter was more
probably drawn with some glutinous preparation, and the silver or gold leaf
pressed upon it.
I saw
variations which could not have occurred if metallic letters had been used.
The word at the end of the third line of our facsimile is abbreviated, to
make it accord with the preceding line.
In the loth line of Dr. Uppstrbm's

On looking minutely at our accurate facsimile,

larger facsimile, to prevent a confused junction of the long stem of ii) with
the long stem of t in the preceding line, the top of {U is bent to the left
in such a manner as could only be done by a pen or pencil.

Being anxious to obtain the most accurate information, even as to
the colour of this invaluable MS., I wrote to Professor Uppstrom. Not
receiving an answer with that promptitude, which his liberality and
kindness of heart always induced him to give, I presumed he had not
received my letter, and wrote again.
The answer came, not from the
learned editor of the Codex Argenteus, but from a mutual friend, A.
Diedrich Wackerbarth, whom I had known long ago, as graduating in
I may add that he has
honours at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.
proved himself to be one of our best Teutonic scholars by his accurate
and spirited translation of Beowulf, from the Anglo-Saxon into English
His letter gives the last sad tidings of one
verse, published in 1849.
of Sweden^s most learned men, and contains so minute a description of
the MS. that I feel assured my readers will thank me for introducing
the substance of it.

"Uppsala, May 6th, 1865.

" Your two letters were unfortunately too late to reach Professor Uppstrom.
His death was very unex-
Our good friend died on the 2i8t of January last.
Your letter of the 6th
pected, and was caused by inflammation of the lungs.
ult. was accordingly placed in the hands of the Professor of Ancient Northern
Literature, Prof. Save, who went, in company with me, to the library two or
three days ago, where I endeavoured by mixing water-colours to get a few
approximations to the colour of the vellum of the Codex Argenteus.
Since

• Origin of Eng. and Germanic Lang. vii. § 10, p. 116.

vi

PREFACE.

—

Our facsimile is the medium colour. My friend then proceeds,

Professor Save is at
tlicn your second letter lias arrived, that of the 2Sth ult.
the i^resent moment exceedingly busy ;
but, being desirous not to keep you
waiting for an answer, he this morning requested me to go up to the library,
re-examine the Codex witli reference to your questions, and make my report
This I have done and herewith communicate the result,"—After
accordingly.
an unsuccessful attempt to give tlie colour with greater precision, he sent me five
specimens of the purple shades of the vellum taken from five different parts of
the Codex.
The colour varies very greatly in
" The vellum is
different parts of the Codex, in some parts indeed it may be said to have dis-
api)eared altogether or very nearly so, whereas in others it is even slightly
darker than the darkest of my imitations, and has much the appearance of
The leaves seem to have been coloured on one side only,
ripe mulberries.
the colour of the back of the sheet beinfj that of the front showinjj throufrh.
Calling the highly coloured side of a sheet the front, and the other side the
back, the leaves seem to have been so arranged that fronts are turned to fronts
and backs to backs, so as to present uniformity of colour on both pages of the
same opening of the book.

still somewhat glossy.

not. .

" I now turn to your other question, namely the probability of Ihre's con-
jecture that the letters are stamped ; or, in other words, that the book is in
To this conjecture
fact printed, only letter by letter instead of sheet by sheet.
I cannot assent, and I may add that Professor Uj^pstrotn held the same oj>inion
The Codex is certainly very beautifully
as myself, so does also Prof. Siive.
written and the letters are remarkably uniform, but strictly uniform they are
. .The breadth of the letter N is usually about 4^ millimetres : similarly
the letter H : when the wi-iter has been a little pressed for room the M and H
are reduced in breadth each to about 3^ millimetres. Now had the writer
formed his letters by means of a stamp, he could only have contracted the
spaces between the letters, not the letters themselves, unless indeed we suppose
he had several stamps of different breadths for each letter, which I do not think
It appears then, that the Codex has not been formed by stamping
probable.
the letters but is throughout manuscript : a most beautiful and uniform manu-
script it must have been, worthy of the pen of Brother Sintram of St. Gall
himself, but written, not stamped.

''Another circumstance, which I think may be worth mentioning, is the
foUowiu"" : On comparing Uppstrom's facsimile page with the original, I ol)serve
that in the Codex the tail of the silver ^, which forms the first letter of the 1 2th
line, goes quite over the arc of the golden P, which begins the next following
From this I presume we may infer, that the gilding was done before

line.

the silvering.

" I may mention that the upper part of the ^) is not unfrequently slightly
bent to the loft, as in the example cited by you, even when there is no letter

GOTHIC—EDIT. OF COD. ARG.

vii

with which it would otherwise interfere.
Indeed all the letters, though quite
sufficiently uniform to present to the eye that regularity which constitutes so
important a portion of what we call beauty in writing, present, when examined
with a magnifying glass and a fine scale, differences of form and dimensions
greater than I think would exist had they been formed with a stamp.

" Prof. Uppstrom, during his last journey in Italy, carefully collated the
MSS. in the Arabrosian and Vatican Libraries as well as that of Wolfenbiittel.
These he prepared for the press and had even just commenced printing when
The work will however not be lost to the
death put an end to his labours.
In fact, it will be edited by Prof.

world, as it has been placed in able hands.

Save.

" I may add that the Codex has evidently been ruled throughout with

double lines for writing : single lines would have been sufficient for stamping."

Tlie Codex Argenteus, containing fragments of the four Gospels, is supposed
to be the work of Italians in their own country at the close of the fifth
The only MS. in exactly the same
century, or the beginning of the sixth.
style of writing, is the celebrated Galilean Psalter* now in the Abbey of
St. Germain des Pres.
It is of the sixth century and is said to have belonged
to St. Germain, Bishop of Paris, who died May 28, 576.
The vellum is stained
of a purple-violet colour, and the writing is in silver letters, and a few particular
This description would serve for the Codex Argenteus, the
words in gold.

vellum of which, however, is purple, exactly as in our facsimile, of a reddish

rather than a violet tint.

The Codex Argenteus was preserved for many centuries in the monastery
In the 17 th century it was
of Werden on the river Ehur, in Westphalia.
transmitted for safety to Prague ; but. Count Kbnigsmark taking that city
in 1648, the Codex Argenteus came into the possession of the Swedes, who
Vossius in 1655, when visiting
deposited it in the Library at Stockholm.
Sweden, became possessed of it, and brought it to, Holland.
Puffendorf, as
lie travelled through Holland in 1662, found it in the custody of Vossius, and
purchased it for Count de la Gardie ; who, after having it bound in silver,
presented it to the Royal Library at Uppsala, where it is still preserved.

I. This imperfect copy of the Four Gospels, beginning Matt. v. 15, was
first printed from a beautiful facsimile made by Derrer ; and, with the Gothic
Glossary of Junius, published by Junius and Marshall, in 2 vols.
4to., at

A most beautiful facsimile of tins MS. was publislied l^y Count Bastard, 1843, in his
Another is given, with a minute description
Rj>lcn«li(l and expensive work on this suljjfict.
of Phite ex. vol. i. p, 296 in Univer.-ial Pala-ography, by M. J. B. Silvestro, translated from
the French and edited by Sir Frederic Madden : Folio Plates, and descriptions in 2 vols. 8vo.
I am indebted for the siglit of these facHimiles to ProfuHSor
H. CI. P>ohn, London, 1850.
J. O. WcHtwood, M.A., F.L.S., author of 'the very beautiful work, Palicogr.ipliia Sacra
Pictoria, &c.

—

viii

PREFACE.

There are two cohimns in each page, the Gotlilc on the left
Dordrecht, 1665.
column, and the Anglo-Saxon on the right ; both in their original characters,
The same
the types for which were cast in Holland, at the expense of Junius.
book, apparently published with new titles, and a reprint of the first sheet
in A^ol. II, the Glossary by Junius, appeared again at Amsterdam in 1684.

II. Stiernhielm, a Swede, republished Ulpliilas, with additions, entitled,

Evangelia ab Ulphila Gothice translata, cum versionibus Sueo-Gothica Norrsena
seu Islandica, et Vulgata Latina, Stockholmice, 4to. 167 1.
Sometimes there is
hound up tvith i^ — Glossarium Ulphila-Gothicum per F. Junium, nunc Sueo-
Gothica auctum, etc. per Georg. Stiernhielm, ib. 1670.

III. The Gothic Gospels were again prepared for the Press by Dr. Eric
Benzelius, and published by Lye, 4to. Oxford, 1750, with a Latin translation,
and notes below the Gothic : a short Gothic Grammar, written by Lye, is pre-
This handsome 4to. of the Clarendon Press was printed with the type
fixed.
which Junius had presented to the University of Oxford after it had been
used at Dordrecht in the Edition of 1665.

IV. A learned Swede, Ihre, a native of Uppsala, and afterwards professor,
favoured the literati in 1753 with his remarks upon the editions of Junius,
Stiernhielm, and Lye. He had constant access to the Codex, and his criti-
cisms and remarks upon the editors' deviations from it are very valuable.
All Professor Ihre's treatises on the Gothic version, and other tracts connected
with the subject, were published under the following title : J. ab Ihre scripta
versionem Ulphilanam et linguam Ma^so Gothicam illustrantia, edita ab Anton.

Frid. Biisching, Berolini, 4to. 1773.

V. The Codex was again prepared and printed in Poman characters with-
out accents, after the corrected text of Ihre, with a literal interlinear Latin
translation, and a more free Latin version in the margin, with a Grammar and
Glossary by F. K. Fulda.
The Glossary revised and the text corrected ]>y
AV. F. II. Reinwald, published by J. C. Zahn, "Weissenfels and Leipsic, 4to. 1 805.
VI. A commentary on parts of the Gospel of St. John, with the following
title: — Skeireins Aiwaggelyons thairh lohannen. — Auslegung des Evangelii
Johannis in gothischer Sprachc von H. F. Massmann, Doctor der Philosoj)hie,
Professor der alteren deutschen Sprachc etc. 4to. Miinchen, 1834.— It contains
an account of the manuscript, p. ix-xvii :— the Commentaiy in Gothic, printed
in facsimile types, p. 3-34 :— the same Gothic tt^xt, in Roman and Italic type
accented, in one column, and a literal Latin vei'sion in the other, with notes
at the foot, p. 37-52 :— an account of the MS. and a short notice of L'lphilas
and the Goths, p. 53-118 :—a complete Glossary of the Oothic words with
ex})lanations in Latin, and the Greek equivalents, p. 1 21-182 : — a facsimile of
Skeireins, and other MSS. p. 183.
VII. Ulfilas :—Veteris et Novi Testamenti versionis Gothicae fragmenta,

quae supcrsunt, ad fidem codd. castigata, Latinitate donata, adnotatione critica

ANGLO-SAXON—ETH ELBE ET.

A

ix

instructa, cum Glossario et Grammatica linguae Gothicse, conjunctis curis
ediderunt H. C. de Gabelentz et Dr. J. Loebe.
Lipsise, apud F. A. Brockhaus,
1836 et 1846.—This is a very valuable work in 2 vols. 4to.
Vol. I. contains
Prolegomena, p. ix-xxxvii : the Gothic text of the Gospels and Epistles, as
far as they have been discovered, with fragments of the Old Testament, printed
in Koman type, without accents ; below is a Latin translation, and under this
are very useful notes in Latin, in 2 cols, small type, p. 1-359-—Vol. 11. con-

tains Vorwort, p. vi—xi : Skeir. p. xii-xvi : Calend. Goth. p. xvii, xviii : Gloss.
p. 1-214: Griechisch-gothisches Worterbuch, p. 215-241 : Gram, der Goth,
p. 1-298.

VIII. Ulphilas von Gaugengigl :

Vol. I. Sprachlehre und Worterbuch :
Vol. II. Gothic New Testament, 2 vols, in i, royal 8vo., with a plate of Gothic
Alphabets.

Passau, 1849.

IX. Uppstrbm's Codex Argenteus, 4to. 1 854-1 857: v. Notes, p. 570, Matt,

i. 21 ; xi. 10.

X. Massmann's Ulfilas*, Stuttgart, 1857, i "^ol. 8vo.

The Gothic text is
printed entirely in Roman letters, of a good legible size, and fills the left hand
Parts of the Septuagint and of the original Greek text and the Vulgate
pages.
Latin Version, both in smaller type than the Gothic, fill the right hand pages.
They are in two columns, and the verses, both of the Greek and Latin, are
The Gothic text is accented according to the system
parallel with the Gothic.
introduced by the celebrated Professor, Dr. James Grimm. Many very valuable
notes, a Glossary, and a brief Gothic Grammar are appended to the Text.
It is a most useful and comprehensive book, containing, in one moderate
8vo. volume, the whole of the Gothic translation of the Old and New Testa-
ments hitherto discovered, and all that is known on the subject.

XI. Ulfila oder die uns erhaltenen Denkmaler der Gothischen Sprache.
Text, Grammatik und Worterbuch. Bearbeitet und herausgegeben von Friedrich
Paderhorn, 1858.—
Ludwig Stamm, Pastor zu St. Ludgeri, in Helmstedt.
plain, good sized, readable text, in Roman type, without accents.

is used.

The

J)

ANGLO-SAXON.— Before Gregory the Great planted Christianity
in England by his missionaries, the energetic and warlike Anglo-Saxons
had scarcely any facilities for intellectual improvement. A gradual
preparation for the public reception of the Christian faith had been
made by the marriage of Ethelbert, king of Kent, with Bertha, a
Frankish princess.
Bertha and her attendants continued their Christian
worship in England, under the direction of the Bishop who accompanied
The exemplary conduct of the Queen impressed the
her from France.
mind of Ethelbert and his court with a favourable opinion of Chris-
* The exact title of this scholarlike and most handy book is given in the Gothic noten

on Matt. i. 21, p. 570.

X

PREFACE.

tianity.

The way being- opened by Bertha, Etlielbert in a.d. 597 gave
a friendly reception to Augustine, the leader of the Christian messengers
As Christian
of i^eace, and assigned them a residence in Canterbury'.
doctrines and discipline expand the mind, and produce a love of
results were seen by the
learning and intellectual pursuits, these
establishment of the first school in Kent by Ethelbert, and by his
written Laws, as well as by the thirst for knowledge raised among
Those, who applied themselves to literature, manifested
his sul)jects.
the strength of their intellectual powers, by a success which could
not have been expected, and can scarcely be surpassed.
That within
a hundred years after the dawn of Christianity and literature upon
the Anglo-Saxons, two such men as Bede and Bonifacius should have
arisen, the one from the most northerly and the other from the southerly
part of England,—from Durham and Devonshire,—is an adequate proof

Bonifacius, a native Saxon, and like all

that the previous absence of literary knowledge did not arise from the
want of intellect, but of opportunity for its cultivation.
Bede had
a European reputation as a Scholar, and Bonifacius as a Christian
the Angles
Missionary.
and Saxons of Germanic origin, speaking a Germanic dialect, was a
most successful herald of peace to his kindred race on the Continent.
His talents, and his heart glowing with benevolence and Christian
zeal, made him the missionary Bishop over the numerous tribes to
whom he had preached with such success, that he is said to have
been the means of converting to the Christian faith more than a
Bede was born in 672, and died in
hundred thousand Germans.
His works were spread over Europe, and so highly esteemed,
735.
that his Ecclesiastical Histor}^, written in Latin, was printed about
the year 1474, among the early works that issued from the German
It was translated into Anglo-Saxon by King Alfred, and is still
press.
a well-known and popular book, though tinged with the credulity of
Bede was a diligent student and
the ajje in which it was written.
translator of the Scriptures, as ^vill soon appear ; but, we must first
observe, that among the many books sent by Gregory the Great to
Augustine, two copies of the Gospels in Latin, of the same size, and
written in the same Roman uncials, are now extant.
After being safely
kept in the Bibliotheca Gregoriana in St. Augustine's Abbey, Canter-
bury, Archbishop Parker, at the dissolution of religious houses, took
charge of these precious MSS. ; one of these he presented, with his
other !MSS. and books, to the Li))rary of Corpus Christi College,
The other copy
Cambridge, whore it still remains in perfect safety.

ANGLO-SAXON VEESION.

xi

we know from the following entry in the margin fol. 2 a, ^^ Robertus
Cotton Cuningtonensis 1602/'' was among the manuscript treasures of
It is now in the safe custody of the Bodleian,
Sir Robert Cotton.
This Oxford Codex appears, from its history, as well as from
Oxford.
its internal evidence, to have been the original from which numerous
copies were made and spread over England as far north as the residence
of Bede in the Monastery of Wearmouth, Durham.
The internal evi-
dence is this, that all the Anglo-Saxon MSS. have the large interpola-
tion given in the note upon Matt. xx. 28, with others which will
This MS. of the Gospels, sent by Gregory the
shortly be mentioned.
Great, is not the Vulgate, but the old Latin Version, the Vetus Italica,
in constant use till the time of Jerome, who guided by it, finished his
As the Anglo-Saxon
Vulgate translation of the Gospels in a.d. 384.
Version was made from the Vetus Italica, it may be useful in ascertain-
ing the readings of this oldest Latin Version. We may cite one or two
examples more in proof that the Anglo-Saxon was from the Vetus
Italica, and not from the Vulgate of Jerome.

In St. Matt, xxvii. 32, the Vulgate has Invenerunt hominem Cyrenseura,
The Anglo-Saxon is word for word from
la this instance the Anglo-Saxon

and omits venientem obviam illis.
the Vetus Italica, as will be seen below.
was evidently translated from the Vetus Italica.

Inveneinint hominem Cyrengeum, venientem obviam illis.
Da gemetton liig senne Cyreniscne man, cumeude heom togenes. Aug. -Sax.
A clause is also omitted in the Vulgate of St. Matt. xxiv. 41, when it is

Vet. Ital.

both in the Vetus Italica and Anglo-Saxon,

Duo in lecto, unus assumetur, et unus relinquetur.
Twegen beo)) on bedde, an by]? genumen, and oder by)? laefed. Ang.-Sax.

Vet. Ital.

Sometimes a word is different in the Vulgate and in the Italic Version, and

the An^o-Saxon then follows the Italic, as in St. Luke xv. 8.

Et evertit doraum. Vet. Ital.
And awent hyre hiis. Ang.-Sax.
Et everrit domum. Vulg.

The Vetus Italica sometimes omits a whole verse, and the same omission
is observed in the Codex Augustinius and in the Anglo-Saxon, when it is con-
This affords further evidence,
tained in the Vulgate, as in St. Matt, xxiii. 14.
that the Anglo-Saxon was translated from the Vetus Italica, and also that the
Ijodleian Codex Augustinius is tlie Italic, and not the Vulgate Version. See the
note upon Matt, xxiii. 14, p. 577.

I

xii

PREFACE.

It is then an interesting* fact, tliat we still possess, in the Bodleian,
one of the copies which Gregory the Great sent to England,—that

it is not a copy of the Vulgate, but of the Vetus Italica, and that it
may be the very copy from which the Anglo-Saxon Version was made.

We are not certain as to the names of those patriotic Anglo-Saxons,
who devoted their time, talents, and learning to the translating of the
Scriptures into Anglo-Saxon, that they might be read by the people,
and in their churches; but we have an indisputable evidence in the
Rubrics, printed in our notes from the ^IS. that they were constantly
read in Anglo-Saxon churches, as the rubrical directions declare what
part of the Scriptures was appointed for successive seasons. We have
no more knowledge of the exact date when the Gospels wei*e first trans-
lated into Anglo-Saxon, than we have of the translators. We are,
however, assured by Cuthbert^, a pupil of the learned Venerable Bede,
the glory of the Anglo-Saxon Church, that he was finishing his trans-
lation of St. John's Gospel immediately before his death on the 27th
As St. John is the last of the Gospels, the three pre-
of May, 735.
ceding had most likely been previously translated.
Cuthbert describes
' When
the last day of Bede's life with Christian simplicity and feeling.
the morning dawned he told us to write diligently what we had begun.
This being done, one of us said,— There is yet, beloved blaster, one
chapter wanting; will it be unpleasant to be asked any more questions?
Take your pen and write with speed.— He
He answered. Not at all.
did so. At the ninth hour he said to me, I have some valuables in
my little chest; fetch them that I may distribute my small presents.
He addressed each and exhorted to praj-er. We wept.
In the evening
when his pupil said. Dear Master, one sentence is still wanting.
Write
it quickly, exclaimed Bede. When it was finished, he said. Support
me while I go to the holy place, where I can pray to my Father.
When he was placed there he repeated the Gloria Patri, and exi)ired
in the effort.^

We have no satisfactory evidence to prove that this was the first
translation of the Gospels, nor that Bede's version has come down to
The Scriptures, in their own tongue, were revered by the Anglo-
us.
Saxons, for Alfred the Great placed the Commandments at the head
of his Laws, and incorporated many passages from the Gospels.
Sub-
sequent translators would naturally avail themselves of the versions
made by their predecessors, and write them in the orthography, the
From these
language, and the style of the time in which they lived.

• Smitli's Bede, p. 793.

ANGLO-SAXON MSS. B.C.

;

xiii

distinguisliing features^ the age of a MS. may be ascertained with
Sometimes persons and places are named^ which
tolerable accuracy.

aid in fixing the date,

Anglo-Saxon MSS. of the Gospels.

Our Anglo-Saxon text* is based
upon the MS. No. CXL. in Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, denoted byB;
and the MS, li. 2. 11. in the University Library, Cambridge, designated by C
collated with Cot. or the Cotton Otho C. I. the MS. in the British Museum,
and with the Hatton MS. No. 38 in the Bodleian, Oxford, referred to in the
notes, by the signature H, compared with Kl. or the MS. of nearly the same
form and date I. A. XIV. in the Boyal Library, British Museum :—collated
also with the Oxford MS. in the Bodleian No. 441, to which a reference is
made in the notes by 0.—Also Bush, or the Bushworth Gloss, in the Bodleian,
No. 3946 ; and the Lindisfarne in the British Museum, Nero D. IV.

The value of these MSS. and the text formed upon their authority will be
best ascertained from a short account of each, chiefly in the alphabetical order
of the letters by which they are designated.

I. B. is described in Wanley's Catal. p. 116, and by Nasmith, p. 213; it
is said to be copied from an older MS. before the Conquest.
I think between
A.D. 990 and 1030. Many vowels are accented.
At the end of St. Matthew's
Gospel is the following note, written in the same form of letter as the MS.
but of a somewhat later date :—Ego ^Ifricus scrips! hunc librum in Monasterio
Badonio, et dedi Brihtwoldo Prepositot.—Dr. Marshall, speaking of this MS.
in 1664, says,—Hunc Codicem et Oxoniensem, rarius reperi ab invicem dis-
sentientes ; superioremque eos vetustatem spirare existimo. (p. 490.)

2. 11.

II. C. denotes the MS. of the Anglo-Saxon Gospels, in the University of
This MS. in small folio, written in a good
Cambridge, marked li.
clear hand about the time of the J Norman Conquest, if not earlier, is very
valualjle for its accuracy in grammatical forms, and orthography as adopted in
the best West-Saxon ; and because it is the only copy which has the Bubrics
complete, and written in the same hand and just after the other parts of the
In 1704, when Wanley wrote his Catalogus
MS.
Historico-Criticus Manuscriptorum Septentrionalium, the leaf, containing the
following note, stood among the waste leaves at the beginning of tliis MS. : it is
now (1865) placed at the end§:— Hunc textum Euangcliorura dcdit Leofricus

Many vowels are accented.

• See Anglo-Saxon Notes, p. 574, col. i. The Anglo-Saxon text.
•} See Anglo-Saxon Notes upon Matt, xxviii. 20w.
§ I might merely state the fact, but I may add, that Mr. Bradshaw of King's College,
who has the care of the MSS. and exauiirieH thctn most minutely, \h Hatirtfiud, from tho kIzo
and the cutting of the j)archment, with other concurring circuniHtanccH, that, when tlic MS.
was originally written, this was the last loaf ; he has, therefore, restored it to wlial, he is
asHured, was its first position.

X Wanley's Catal. p. 152.

—

—

xiv

PREFACE.

cpiscopus ccclesiib Sancti Petri Apostoli in Exonia ad utilitatcm succcssorum
suorinn. Tlicn iininediately follows in the same Anglo-Saxon hand as the Codex,
but of a little later date,— Das boc Leofric biscop gef Sancto Petro and ealluni
his a*ftergenguni into Exancestre Gode mid to denienne.
At the foot of a waste leaf, placed before the MS. is this note :—Hunc Codi-
cem Evangeliorum Gregorius Dodde, Decanus Ecclesiae Exoniensis, cum assensu
fratrum suorum Canonicorum dono dedit Matthseo Cantuariensi Archicpiscopo,
qui ilium in banc novum formam redigi et ornari curavit. 1566.

The Gospels occupy p. 1-343.

hand of Archbishop Parker,— " Matth^eus Cantuar: 1574."

On the upper margin of page i of this MS. is written in the bold, clear
At the foot of this
page in the same clear hand, " Continet pag. 401," i. e. The entire MS. contains
Pseudo-Evangelium Nichodemi, p.
401 i)p.
344-383, published by Thwaites at the end of his Heptateuchus in 8vo. 1698.
Kathanis Judwi Legatio Fahulosa ad Tiber iuiii Ccesarem, p. 383-401.
All the
401 pages of the MS. are written in tlie same bold and distinct Anglo-Saxon
hand. The Rubrics are in faded, dark red letters of the same form as the MS.,
but Avritten after the text was finished, as they often extend far into the margin,
the latter words being placed at the end of one or more consecutive lines of
the MS. : for example in Matt, xi., MS. p. 37, line 14-17.
The letters of the
Rubrics were most likely formed, when the Capital letters were coloured.
The
Gospels are divided into paragraphs, denoted by large plain Cajntal letters of
different colours, some of which, especially the green and light blue, are as
There is generally, but not always, a Rubric
Three or four paragraphs are often included in
at the head of each paragraph.
a Chapter ; and the chapters of our modern versions sometimes begin in the
middle or other parts of the paragraphs of this MS., in which there was not
originally the least indication of such a division.

bright as if recently coloured.

III. This is what remains of the once fine MS. written on vellum before
the Norman Conquest, and denoted by Cot. because it is in the Cotton Library,
British Museum, Otho C. I. A minute description is given of it by Wanley
in A. D. 1704*, when it was in a perfect state from ]\ratt. xxvii. 6.
It wj\s so
much injured by the fire, which destroyed many of Sir Robert Cotton's MSS.
on the 23rd of Oct. 173 1, that, what was defective only as far as Matt, xxvii. 6
before that calamity, afterwards looked like a charred mass.
Planta, in his
Catalogue of the Cotton MSS., describes it as " once consisting of 290 leaves,
l)ut now (1802) so much burnt and contracted as to render the binding of it
It was fortunately kept in a case ; and what was found im-
impracticable."
])racticable by Mr. Planta, has been eflVcted under the careful su})erintondence
of Sir Frederic Madden, by whose judicious aiTangements many MSS. have
The smallest part of this
been restored, and made accessible to the jmblic.
burnt mass has been carefully mounted on thick folio paper, which is cut away

• Catal. p. 211, 212.

—

—

—

ANGLO-SAXON MSS. H. O. Rl.

xv

It is now bound in two large folio vols.

in tbe middle to fit the injured vellum, and made fast by transparent paper,
gummed to the edges of the paper and the vellum ; the MS. can, therefore, be
easily read on both sides.
Sir Frederic
Madden tells us —that twenty-five folios are lost since Wanley described it.
The first small fragment of this MS. now remaining is from folio 26, which Sir
F. Madden has marked as part of St. Mark vii. 22.
Such a note deserves the
best thanks of all who consult the MS. as it saves much of their time.
The
St. Luke is nearly com-
fragments increase a little in size from folio 26 to 38.
St. John fills fol. 95-135, and is nearly perfect,
plete, and occupies fol. 39-93.
There are not any rubrical directions, and only
especially in the latter part.
a few badly formed capital letters of a dingy red colour in this MS.
The
accents are neither numerous nor carefully applied.

IV. H. The Hatton MS. No. 38 in the Bodleian*, Oxford, is the size of
a large 8vo. and written on vellum, in a very uniform and beautiful, but late
hand, about the time of Henry 11.
The letters are so uniform, upright, and
It formerly be-
near together, as to appear like printing in facsimile types.
longed to the Rev. John Parker, son of Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canter-
bury, who wrote his name in red chalk, " lohes parker," on the verso and top Qf
Wanley tells us that the missing leaf Lk. xvi. was neatly
the first fly-leaf.
The four Gospels are arranged not in the
written and inserted by Mr. Parker.
usual order, but St. Matt, is placed after St. Luke ; thus, Mark, Luke, Matthew,
The only Rubric in Anglo-Saxon is this at the beginning of St.
and John.

John,—Her onginjj dset god spell de Johannes se godspellere gewrat on Path-
mos dam eiglande.—The accents are few, and capriciously applied.

V. This MS. denoted by Rl. is in the Royal Library, British Museum, I. A.
It is veiy similar to the Hatton in the 8vo. size, but a little smaller.
XIV.
The writing is somewhat earlier in date, and less regular than the Hatton.
There are
The Rubrics are very few, and of a brighter red than the Hatton.
The four Gospels are
scarcely any accents ; yet Ysaac is found in fol. 33, 5.
placed in this order,—Mark, Matthew, Luke, and John.— St. Mark begins,
Her ys Godspclles angin, Halendes
Iiiitium Scl Euangelii secundum Marcum.
Cristes Godes sune, swa awriten is on jjas witegan bee Isaiam. — Her ongind
Begins, SoSlice wcl is to understanden "p
Matheus boc j^as luilga Godspelleres.
after Matheus gerecednysse her his oncneornysse boc Hselendes Cristes Dauides
&t. Luke, Nu we willaS her cow arecccn Lucas boc 'Sa3S halgan God-
|)are }'ingc wace go
8])el]cres.
endebyrdcn Sc on us gcfyldc sint, swa us bctahtcn })a j'c hit of frimSc gesawon,

Begina, For?5am t^e wytodlice manega })ohtc

Buna.

a.s

and t5arc sprspce )je nas wa;ron.—Then follows the Rubric to St. John precisely
tlie Hatton MS.—This Royal MS. belonged to St. Augustine's Al)beyt,
It was also in possession of Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of

Canterbury.
Canterbury, whose name is written on the upper margin of the first leaf.

ill

Wanlcy's Catal. p. 76.

t Ibid. i>.

i8(.

xvi

PREFACE.

VI. 0. The Oxford MS. in the Botllciaii, No. 441, is closely allied to the
best M8S. B, C, and Cot. ; namely to I, II, and III.—This Oxford MS. of the
four Anglo-Saxon Gospels is in small folio, written before the Xormau Con-
quest*, in a fine bold Anglo-Saxon character, and has some vowels accented.
The Rubrics are wi'itten in a small and recent hand, between the paragraphs ;
The first six leaves of St. Mark, fol.
or, for want of room, in the margin.
57-62, fol. 90, fol. 131, and fol. 150, also the last three leaves of St. John,
fol. 192-194, are written in a small and recent hand upon new parchment,
with few accents. — The first edition of the Anglo-Saxon Gospels by John
Foxe, in 157 1, was printed from this Oxford MS. No. 441.
It was also the
basis of the edition by Junius and Marshall in 1665.

VII. The Latin of the Lindisfarne Gospels, or the Durham Book, is said to
have been written about a.d. 687 by Eadfrith, a monk, and the interlinear and
Both
verbal Anglo-Saxon Gloss, by Aldred a Priest, between 946 and 968.
Eadfrith and Aldred became Bishops of Durham.

It is one of our finest MSS.

VIII. The Latin of the Rushworth Gospels appears to be written about the
end of the 7tli century; and the interlinear and verbal Anglo-Saxon Gloss of
The first three Gospels have been published by the Surtees Society.
St. Mark

the loth.
St. Matthew, edited by the Rev. Joseph Stevenson, M.A., 8vo. 1854.
in 1 86 1, and St. Luke in 1863, both edited by Geo. Waring, Esq., M.A.

Printed editions.— I. The Anglo-Saxon Gospels were first printed, at
the suggestion and expense of Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury,
under the care of John Foxe, the Martyrologist, with this title :— "The Gospels
of the fower Euangelistes translated in the olde Saxons tyme out of Latin into
the vulgare toung of the Saxons, newly collected out of Auncient Monumentes
of the sayd Saxons, and now published for testimonie of the same at London.
Printed by John Daye dwelling oner Aldersgate. 157 i. Cum PriuUcyio Eeguc
Maiestatis per Decenniumy The text is in the clear and readable Anglo-Saxon
type, used by Daye in ^Ifric's " Sermon on Easter day," 1567 +, the first book
The Anglo-Saxon occupies two-thirds the width of
printed in Anglo-Saxon.
the pai^e, and the remaining third is filled with the English Version of the
Foxe wrote the long dedication to Queen
Bishops' Bible in small old English.
The chief object for the publication of these Gospels is thus stated

in the Preface :—" We hauc published especially to this end, that the said boke

Elizabeth.

imprinted thus in the Saxons letters, may remaine in the Church as a profitable
example, and president of olde antiquitie, to the more confirmation of your
gratious proccdinges now in the Church ngreable to the same. Wherin as we haue
to see how much we are beholden to the reuerend and learned father in God,
Matthew Archbishop of Cant, a cheefe and a famous trauailler in thys Church
of Itlnglaudy by whose industrious diligence and learned labours, this booke,

• Wanloy, p. 64.
i" See Origin of Eng. and Gcr. Languages, iii. 9, page 18, note .

:

:

:
:

WYCLIFFE.

—

xvii

with others moe, hath bene collected and searched out of the Saxons Monu-
metes : so likewise haue we to vnderstand and conceaue, by the edition hereof,
how the religion presently tanght and professed in the Church at thys present,
is no new reformation of thinges lately begonne, which were not before, but
rather a reduction of the Church to the Pristine state of olde conformitie,
which once it had." (p. 9.)

II. A much improved edition of the Anglo-Saxon Gospels* was published,
with the Gothic by Junius and Marshall, in 1665, with the following ample
title,— Quatuor D. N. Jesu Christi Euangeliorum Versiones perantiqua) du£e,
Gothica scil. et Anglo-Saxonica : quarura illam ex celeberrimo Codice Argenteo
nunc primum depromsit Franciscus Junius, Francisci filius. Hanc autem ex Codi-
cibus MSS. cpllatis emendatius recudi curavit Thomas Mareschallus, Anglus :
cujus etiam Observationes in utramque Versionem subnectuntur.—Accessit et
Glossarium Gothicum : cui prsemittitur Alphabetum Gothicum, Runicum, etc.
opera ejusdem Francisci Junii.—Dordrechti. Typis et sumptibus Junianis.

Excudebant Henricus et Joannes Esssei, Urbis Typographi Ordinarii. cioioclxv.
III. A very neat and handy edition of the Anglo-Saxon Gospels appeared
in i2mo, London 1842, with this title—Da Halgan Godspel on Englisc.—The

Anglo-Saxon Version of the holy Gospels, edited from the original manuscripts,
by Benjamin Thorpe, F.S.A.

London, Rivington : Oxford, Parker : 1842.

One peculiar feature of the Anglo-Saxon version may be noticed,
before we speak of the next translation. Those terms,, which are adopted
in other versions from the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, are generally
translated by indigenous Anglo-Saxon compounds, so descriptive as to
Ije intelligible to every reader. A very few examples will be sufficient
to show this principle, and the compositive power of the Anglo-Saxon
For Centurion they used hundred-man, similar to the Lat.
language.
—Dropsy, a man
Centurio :—Disciple, leorning-cniht, a learning youth
with the dropsy was called wajter-seoc-man :—Parable, bigspel, a near
—Resurrection, scrist,
example :— Repentance, died-bot, an amends-deed
— Scribe, boc-ere,
boc-wor, a hook man : — Synagogue, gesamnung, a congregation : —

— Sabbath, reste-daeg, a day of red

a rWviKj ar/ain

Treasury, gold-hord, gold-koard.

WYCLIFFE.—Till the discovery of printing in the i^ih century,
the Holy Scriptures and other writings could only be published, or
made generally known, by Lectures and by the slow process of manu-
years, WyclifPe was more or loss
As Tutor, Head of

8crii)ts.
closely connected with the University of Oxford.

Between forty and fifty

• See Description of this vol. in Gothic, p. vii. No. I,

I

xviii

PREFACE.

a College, and Professor of Divinity, he had great faoilities for making
In addition to the members of noble
the Gospel generally known.
families, and men educated for lay professions, those especially preparing
for the Church attended his Lectures, and were educated under his
superintendence ; taking with them into every parish throughout the
whole country, the learning and impressions they had received in the
University, giving lectures upon his principles, and often becoming his
The important part, taken
willing agents in transcribing his works.
by Wycliffe in preparing for the Reformation by the translation of
the Scriptures, will be best seen by a short notice of the chief incidents
of his life.

John Wycliffe is said to have been born in 1324 at a small village of
that name, near Richmond, in Yorkshire ; and, at the age of sixteen,
to have become one of the first members of Queen''s College, founded
in 1340. He was a fellow of Merton College in 1356.
AVith much
natural talent, unwearied assiduity, and a facility in acquiring know-
ledge, this diligent and unobtrusive student gained in the University
great reputation for his learning, and faithful friends by his decision
•of character, combined with kindness of heart and unassuming manners.
lie was deservedly popular, and was much attached to Oxford for the
literary facilities and the uninterrupted quietude which he could not find
During more than twenty
anywhere so perfect as in the University.
years he gratified his insatiable desire for knowledge on all subjects,
never neglecting to devote a specified time for reading the Bible, making
all other knowledge subservient to the great object he ever kept in view,
a thorough knowledge of the Scriptures. He read the Latin Fathers
with great care, and studied Aristotle, the profound reasoner of the
As the Greek language and literature were little kno^^'n and
Greeks.
almost forgotten in England before the taking of Constantinople by
^^ic Greeks fled for refuge to other
the Turks in a. d. 1453, ^'^^^^^
countries, where they introduced and interpreted the ancient Greek
authors, Wy elide had not the means of acquiring a knowledge of Greek.
He could, therefore, study Aristotle only in the Latin translations and
Even with such inadequate assistance he became a most
commentaries.
subtle reasoner, and an unrivalled disputant, able to encounter the
IHs great opponent, the Chronicler
intricacies of scholastic divinity.
Knighton, admits that, while AVyclille was generally esteemed a most
eminent theologian, he had no equal in the employment of the scholastic
art of disputation.

About the year 1360, circumstances occurred which called forth

WYCLIFFE OPPOSES THE FRIARS.

xix

Wycliffe^s extraordinary talents.
Oxford was so celebrated as a seat
of learning in the reign of Henry III. that an immense number of
students came to the University from all parts of England and from
Anthony Wood, in his Annals*, tells us they amounted
the Continent.
to thirty thousand. When all allowance is made for this almost in-
credible estimate of the students by one of Oxford^s most partial
By
friends,, it at least indicates the popularity of the University.
the undue influence of the mendicant Friars, the younger students were
tempted to leave the Colleges for the Convent, till they are
said
The Church of Rome, to re-
to have been reduced to six thousand.
vive the monastic institutions, established the four orders of Mendicants,
the August i lies, Carmelites, Dominicans and Franciscans.
The first
establishment of the Dominicans was at Oxford in 1221. With other
privileges, the Popes had allowed the Friars the liberty of superintending
They had their own exempt jurisdiction ; and, in their un-
education.
remitted endeavours to gain converts by trespassing on the statutes
of the University, they were involved in continual disputes with the
Chancellor and Scholars.
The University and the Church suffered so
much by this interference, that a Convocation was assembled, and a de-
cree passed, that no youth, under the age of eighteen, should be received
The contest became so warm and
by the Friars into their orders.
exasperating, that Wycliffe entered into the defence of his beloved
University with such zeal, energy and success, as to confound the
He
Friars.
overwhelmed them by his arguments and learning, and brought them
into popular disgrace by his pamphlets on the '^ able beggary '' ab-
surdly advocated hj the Friars.

They could not resist his plain and honest reasoning.

The whole University was gratified by this display of Wycliffe^s
energy, talents and learning ; and, in testimony of respect and gratitude,
elected him Warden or Master of Balliol College or Hall, as it was then
In the early part of 1361, he was presented by his College to
called.
the valualjle Rectory of Fillingham in Lincolnshire, which he afterwards
exchanged for Ludgershall in Buckinghamshire, that he might be within
a few miles of his numerous friends in the University.
In the year 1365
Simon de Islij), Archbishop of Canterbury, appointed liim Warden of
Canterbury Hall, now occut)ied by the Canterbury Quadrangle of Christ
In 1367 he defended Edward III. in refusing to pay Pope
Church.
Urban the tribute which had been claimed ever since it was exacted
from the weak King John.
Wycliffe wrote with such ability, and used

• Vol. i. p. 206; Baber, p. 1 1.

C 2

XX

PREFACE.

such convincing arg-uments, as to prove, beyond any future doubt, the
The See of Rome was silent but indignant,
illegality of the claim.
looking upon Wycliire with a jealous eye, as the cause of the defeat.
In England this defence increased the fame of its author, and procured
for him the favourable regard of the Duke of Lancaster and both Houses
Edward III. had previously made him one of his
of Parliament.

Chaplains.

In 1372 WyclifTe was gratified by obtaining the chief desire of his
His whole life had
heart, the election to the Professorship of Divinity.
been spent in preparing himself for the faithful discharge of the duties
Being elevated to a Professorship,
devolving on the Divinity Professor.
which enabled him to diffuse with authority that light which had
already beamed on his own mind, he used great judgment in his lectures
and in the theological discussions over which he presided.
His experi-
ence taught him that deep-rooted principles and old customs must be
His heart was filled v\ath piety towards
treated with a gentle hand.
God and love to man, which were always manifested by his unaffected
simplicity of manner, in language as plain and expressive as it was
His lectures always attracted a large audience, as he was ever
elegant.
more desirous of correcting error by the statement of truth, than by
direct and personal attacks. When he had felt his w\ay, and had
obtained numerous supporters in the University, the majority of whom
read and studied the Scriptures not only critically but practically;
with such friends, he threw off all reserve and spoke of vital religion,
the religion of the heart with its practical results, and the best means of
promoting them amongst the people.
His lectures and sermons were
full of the Scriptures, forming short treatises on Divinit}', worthy of the
Oxford Professor. He entertained a deep conviction, that the only way
of promoting vital and practical religion in the mass of the population,
was by giving them the Word of God in their own tongue. He had,
therefore, for some time been engaged in translating the Scriptures into
English, from the Latin Vulgate, the authorised version of the Church
of that day. Many of his most able and faithful friends assisted him in
While he was increasing in Christian knowledge, and
thiij holy work.
imparting it to the common people, as well as to those numerous
students of the University who attended his Lectures for the acquisition
of that scriptural knowledge, which would enable them to discharge
faithfully the duties of parish Priests throughout the whole land,—his
reputation, his piety and worldly prosperity went hand in hand.
His
past services to the crown were rewarded in 1374, by his being presented

WYCLIFFE'S DEATH.

xxi

victory of Wycliffe.

As ecclesiastics were generally
to the valuable R-ectory of Lutterworth.
the best educated men of that time, and therefore well prepared to assist in
state affairs, Wycliffe was employed by the Government as a Diplomatist
The See of Rome could not forget the rebuke and
in several embassies.
Though silent, Home was ever watchful for an
Wycliffe and his
opportunity of crushing the successful opponent.
friends went on, with great zeal and energy, in their work of translating
As his knowledge of revelation in-
and disseminating the Scriptures.
creased, and his view of divine truth was cleared, he manifested greater
decision and fully declared his religious opinions. When his friends, who
had supported him from motives of state policy, saw that his govern-
The See of Rome
ing principle was scriptural truth, they forsook him.
seized the opportunity, and annoyed and persecuted him j but opposition
could not retard his work.

This brief notice must not be lengthened by entering into details : it
is only necessary to state, that Courtney, Archbishop of Canterbury,
under the influence of the Church of Rome, with the aid of the Aristoc-
racy and the sanction of the timid Richard II., brought a bill into the
House of Lords to arrest Wycliffe and his followers, ^' and hold them in
^' strong prison till they justify themselves according to the law and
'^ reason of Holy Church^.''''
As' soon as the Bill had passed the Lords,
The House of Commons
Courtney endeavoured to carry it into effect.
The
remonstrated upon its illegality, not having passed their house.
Chancellor of the University excused himself by declaring, that his own
life and the peace of the University would be endangered, if Wycliffe
were taken. To allay the fury of the storm, Wycliffe thought it prudent,
But persecution was so severe
in Nov. 1382, to retire to the country.
and unrelenting, that he was compelled to descend from what had been
his throne—his professorial chair, and to leave the University for ever.
He sought retirement at Lutterworth, where, despite all opposition and
persecution, he fearlessly wrote in defence of his doctrines, and proceeded
in his work of completing and revising the translation of the Scriptures^
till his death, on the last day of Dec. 1384.

The bitter feeling and hostility of the See of Rome did not end with
Wyc'liffe's death, but by a decree of the Council of Constance his remains
were disinterred in 1428, then burnt and the ashes cast into the Swift,
But Wycliffe lives, and ever
a streamlet which runs by Lutterworthf.

Gil)HoirH Co<lex .Itir. Eccles. Anglican, p. 399.

+ See Life <.f Wycliffe by Foxe, 1610 : Lewis, 1720 : Baber, 1810 : Le Buh, 1R23 : Tytler,

1826: Vftughan, 1845.

xxii

—
m E F A C E.

will live in tlic hearts and affections of the An^lo-Saxon race, as the first
translator of the whole of the Scriptures into English.

As Oxford was the chief scene of Wycliffe's literary enjo}Tnent and
fame, the home of his heart, a retreat which he always souo^ht with
l)leasure and left with reg-ret, it is gratifpng- to know that Oxford has
raised an imperishable monument to Wycliffe's memory by publishing",
at its own expense, the splendid edition in 4 vols. 4to. of

"The Holy Bible, containing the Old and New Testaments, with the Apoc-
ryphal Books, in the earliest English Versions made from the Latin Vulgate
by John Wycliffe and his Followers ; edited by the Rev. Josiah Forshall, F.R.S.
etc., late Fellow of Exeter College, and Sir Frederic Madden, K.H. F.R.S. etc.,
Keeper of the MSS. in the British Museum.
Oxford, at the University Press
1850."

This is one of the best, most laborious, and accurate editions of any
The editors have examined
early English author I have ever seen.
and described 170 MSS., and selected and most carefully printed two of
the best in parallel columns, the first written before 1390, and the
The Prologues and every available and desirable
second before 1420.
information have been given. A very excellent and ample Glossary is
Altogether, this edition is the work of sound
appended to the 4th vol.
and ripe scholars,— an honour to the University of Oxford and their
All must acknow-
press, as w^ell as to the literary veterans, the editors.
ledge with them, that "they have spared neither time nor pains to
especially when it is known, that " A
render their work complete ;"
considerable portion of their time, during nearly twenty-two years, has
been spent in accomplishing their task.^'

T^fcf- P- xxxviii.

Our text of Wycliffe's Gospels is founded upon the first version given in
this Oxford edition of 1850, collated with the original MS. in the Bodleian,
This MS. is \NTitten on vellum, in large fol.
No. 369 of the Douce Collection.
2 cols. ff. 486 [429 bis], consisting of two distinct MSS., l)oth imperfect.
Tiic
first is written with marginal corrections throughout, in three difterent hands,
The second part of the volume, from fol. 2.^1 to the end,
all before 1390*.
containing the Text of our Gospels, is written about the same time as the
former, that is before 1390, say the preceding year 1389, the date I have
n(l(>])tcd. A facsimile of this MS., >ratt. vi. 14, 15, is given in the i)late facing
Sir F. Madden says, in Pref. p. xxi., that " the version described ....
the Title.
is to a greater or less degree the work of Wycliffe ; that it is the earliest transla-
tion of the whole Bible in the English language, admits of no reasonable doubt."

* Sir F. Maclden'8 Pref. p. 1. No. 87.

TYNDALE.

—

xxiii

Editions of Wycliffe.—The numbers I. II. and III. were from the text

before 1420, adopted as the later text in the Oxford edition of 1850.

I. The New Testament of Wycliffe was first printed in folio, London 1731,
by the Rev. John Lewis, Minister of Margate, Kent, with a short Glossary or
The
Explanation of the old and obsolete words in Dr. WyclifFe's Translation.
text was taken from two MSS., one of which was his own [now, 1850, Sir F.
Madden states, in the Bodleian, Gough, Eccl. Top. 5] and the other the property
of Sir Edward Deering, Bart., now, 1850, of the Very Rev. Wm. Conybeare,
dean of Llandafi".

II.

The Rev. Henry Baber, M. A., republished in 4to:, London 18 10, a
reprint of the preceding with the following additions, which are very valuable,
and deserve the attention of every scholar. "A short memoir of the Life,
Opinions and Writings of Dr. Wycliffe : an historical account of the Saxon
and English versions of the Scriptures which have been made previous to the
The Glossary of Lewis at the end of the vol. is corrected
fifteenth Century.
and considerably enlarged." (p. v.)

III. The New Testament in the same version as that published by the
Rev. John Lewis was again published in 1841, from a MS. then belonging to
H. R. H. the Duke of Sussex, [now, 1850, in the collection of the earl of
Ashburnham,] by Messrs, Bagster, in the English Hexapla, 4to; Lond. 1841.
IV. When the 4to. edition of 1850 was commenced, Sir F. Madden says,

Pref. p. i. note ^—"No part of the earlier of the two versions before 1390 had

ever been printed, with the exception of the Song of Solomon, given by Dr.
Adam Clarke in his commentary on the Bible, [8 vols. 4to. Lond. 1810-25,]
from a MS. in his own library," [now Brit. Mus. Eg. 618, 619].

V. In 1848, the New Testament in the earlier version, was printed by
Mr. Lea Wilson, from a MS. in his own possession, [now, 1850, in the hands
of the earl of Ashburnham,] under the title The New Testament in English,
t/roMslated hy John Wycliffe, circa MCCCLXXX. etc. 4to. Lond.

TYNDALE.—The mind cannot be fettered by man_, however power-
ful. We yearn for freedom of heart and soul.
All the gifts of God are
So is the light of his divine revela-
as free as the light of the sun.
tion free to all. By the light of the divine word man sees and knows
the truth, and the truth makes him free*.
Free from the thraldom of
His freedom is not for selfish noss, dissension and
evil
strife, but for order, harmony and truth. At particular times, we see a
man raised up, whose love for truth is so great, that it frees him from
all fear of evil and even from the fear of death, when put in competition

and to do good.

• " Ye Hhall know the truth, and [^ iL\-f]Bua iKtvOtpuxTfi vnas] the truth shall make you

xxiv

PREFACE.

with truth.

Such was William Tyndale, as will be seen by a few par-
William Tyndale, the second of three sons of John
ticulars of his life.
Tyndale of Ilunt^s Court, in the parish of Noi*th Nibley, in Gloucester-
shire, is said to have been born there about the year 1484. He descended
At an early age he was sent to Oxford.
from IIu<^'h 13aron de Tyndale.
John Foxe tells us, Wm. Tyndale ^' was brought up from a child in the
University of Oxford, where he by long continuance grew up and in-
creased, as well in the knowledge of tongues and other liberal arts ; as
specially in the knowledge of the Scriptures, whereunto his mind was
singularly addicted ; insomuch that he read privily to certain students
and fellows of Magdalen College some parcel of divinity.
His manners
and conversation were such that all, who knew him, reputed and
esteemed him to be a man of most virtuous disposition and of life un-
Thus he in the University of Oxford, increasing more and
spotted.
more in learning, and proceeding in degrees of the schools, spying his
time, removed from thence to the University of Cambridge.^' He pro-
bably went to Cambridge with the view of profiting by the instruction
of Erasmus, who lectured on the Greek language in that University,
At Cambridge he formed an
from 1509 till the beginning of 151 4.
acquaintance with a young and diligent student, John Frith, who after-
wards assisted him in his translation of the New Testament.
It must
have been about 1518, in his thirty-fourth year, when, as Foxe tells us,
Tyndale " had made his abode a certain space now further ripened in
the knowledge of God's word, leaving that University also, he resorted
to one Maister Welch, a knight of Gloucestershire, and was there school-
This was
maister to his children, and in good favour with his maister.^'
Sir John Welch, of Little Sodbur}^, at whose house Tyndale held many
disputes on religious subjects with the clerical dignitaries of the neigh-
This brought him into so
bourhood, who frequented Sir John's table.
much danger, that he deemed it prudent to leave the country and go to
London.

It is difllcult to fix the time of his ordination; we only know that,
after preaching at St. Dunstan's in the West the same earnest and
practical sermons delivered in the country, be attempted to obtain
the patronage of Tonstall, Bishop of London, by sending his translation
of the Attic Greek Orator, Isocrates. He was unsuccessful, as the
Bishop's palace was full; but an eminent merchant, Humfrey Monmouth,
a favourer of Luther, admitted him into his house ; and when Tyndale
'^ understode at the laste, not only that there was no ro\\Tne in my lorde
of london's palace to translate the new testament, but also that there

TYNDALE^S NEW TEST. 1526.

xxv

was no place to do it in all englonde/^ [Prol. to Pentateuch _, 1530^] he
His friend Monmouth settled upon
determined to go to Germany.
him an annuity of ten pounds^ about c5^i5o of our money^ and paid his
passage that he might live abroad and finish his translation of the New
Testament from Greek into English. He is said to have gone to Witten-
berg to confer with Luther^ who published in 1532 his first edition of
his New Testament in German.
Tyndale and his friend John Frith
were driven from place to place, till* at last they settled in the free
imperial city of Worms on the Rhine, where Tyndale^s first edition of
the New Testament was printed at the end of 1525 or in the early part
of 1526, in very small octavo.

The beautiful facsimile edition of Mr. Francis Fry, F.S.A., has been noticed
and the full title given in the notes on Tyndale's translation*. He has taken
so much pains to acquire accurate information, as to the printer, the place and
the date of this first edition of Tyndale's New Testament, that I gladly refer
I have only room
to his satisfactory introduction, illustrated by facsimiles.
for a very brief summary.
Peter Schoffer on becoming a Lutheran, found it
necessary to leave Mayence, and to settle in the free city of Worms in 1512.
Fourteen works printed by Schoffer from 1518 to 1529, seven of which have the
imprint Worms, have been carefully compared with the capital letters, the three
sizes of type, the woodcut of St. Paul, and the numerals used in the New Testa-
ment of Tyndale, and they perfectly accord.
Not only the type, but the length
of the lines and their number in each page, are exactly the same in the two
German editions of the Prophets as in Tyndale's Testament.
The water-marks
If then the same type, the length and the
in the paper are also the same.
number of lines in a page, the same woodcut and water-mark are found in the
other works of Sclioffer, printed at Worms, as in Tyndale's New Testament of
1526, can there be any reasonable doubt that it was printed at Worms by
Peter Schoffer, corroborated as this inference is by the Lutheran profession of
Schoffer, and the residence of Tyndale at Worms 1
There is not any date in
but, as Cochla^us caused Tyndale to flee to Worms in the
the Testament ;
middle of 1525, and the Testament was printed there immediately after, we
may conclude it was puhlislied by the end of that year, or the beginning of the
next, as it was sold in Oxford " before the 7th of Feb. i526t."

Library of St. Paul's Cathedrnl.

There is an imperfect copy of Tyndale's New Testament of 1526 in the
The only copy known to exist, perfect from
the Ijcginning of St. Matt, to the end of Ptcvehition, is in the Baptist's College,
Of this Bristol copy, Mr. Fry has taken a very correct facsimile,
The

Bristol.
which was made ou tracing paper, tiansferrcd to stone, and printed.

* NotftH, p. 584.

t AiiderHotrH Annals (»f tin* English lUble, vol. i. p. 93.

xxvi

PREFACE.

whole lithographic impression consists of one hundred and seventy-seven copies,

of which twenty-six arc in 4to.

Our o^ratitude is due to the free city of Worms, for the protection
of Tyndale, while printing* tlie first edition of his New Testament.
In
England's days of darkness and persecution, on the false plea of religion,
w^hich, when pure, and under the mild and sympathizing influence of
the Gospel, abhors tyranny, we are deeply indebted to Hamburg and^
other free cities of Germany ; and, in after times of still greater gloom,
to Holland and Switzerland for their friendly reception and protection
of our refugee countrymen, when their lives were imperilled at home, for
conscientiously adhering to those truths which they had learned from
In these free cities and states, our countrymen were

the Scriptures.

received as brethren, with honour,—their talents and learning acknow-
Though Tyndale had
ledged, and their works printed and published.
the reputation of being well versed in modern as w^ll as ancient lan-
guages, we should not have known the extent of his lingual acquire-
ments, nor whether the first impression of his New Testament was
large or small, if the following facts in the year 1526 had not been re-
corded, by the friendly hand of a foreigner, in the diary of Spalatinus,
secretary of Frederic, the elector of Saxony, and supporter of Luther.
Von Busche, Professor of Hebrew in the University of Marburg, a per-
sonal friend of Tyndale, " told us that six thousand copies of the New
Testament in the English language had been printed at Worms ; and
that this translation had been made by an Englishman, sojourning there
with two other natives of England, who was so skilled in seven lan-
guages, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Italian^ Spanish, English, and German,
that whichever he might be speaking, you would think it to be his
native tongue "^.'^

The quarto translation with notes, partly printed at Cologne, was
finished at Worms in 1526, as wtII as the very small octavo already
The Dutch booksellers found such ready sale for Tvndale's
described.
translation, that they issued several editions, without any correction or
supervision of the translator, who is supposed to have gone to Hamburg
after 1526 to obtain the best Hebrew criticism, from the learned Jews in
that city, and to correct what lie had translated of the Old Testament
by the original Hebrew.
There he met with Miles Coverdale, who
assisted him in translating the five books of Moses into English, printed

• Schelhornii Amoinitates Literarice, torn. iv. p. 431.

Exceq)ta quaedam e diario Geo,

^palatini.

—

TYNDALE^S MARTYRDOM.

xxvii

by the Hamburg* press in 1530.
Tyndale^s English version of Jonah
issued from the same press in 153T. We next hear of Tjndale at Ant-
werp, where he found a faithful friend in Thomas Poyntz, an English
merchant, who cordially received him into his house.
While residing
in this respected family, besides preaching to the English residents, he
most carefully revised his translation of the New Testament, and in
1534, after the lapse of eight years, published it with this title :

The Newe Testament, dylygently corrected and compared with the Greke
by Willyam Tindale : and fynesshed in the yere of oure Lorde God anno M.D.
and XXXIIII. in the moneth of Nouember.—Then follows.
" W. T. vnto the
Reader. Here thou hast (moost deare reader) the New Testament, or covenaunt
made wyth us of God in Christes bloude.
Which I have looked over agayne
(now at the last), with all dylygence, and compared it vnto the Greke, and have
weded oute of it many fautes, which lacke of helpe at the begynninge and
oversyght dyd sowe therin."

T^Tidale^s translation of the Scriptures had been denounced by public
authority in England; and, by an imperial decree promulgated at the
diet of Augsburg in 1530, persons accused of heresy could be seized and
Those who opposed the reading of the Scriptures in
cast into prison.
the language of the people were enraged when they saw the increased
supply of the English version ; and, availing themselves of the imperial
decree, they employed secret influence and agency for the capture of
Henry Philips was sent to Antwerp, who, under the guise
Tyndale.
of friendship, inveigled him from the house of Poj^ntz in August 1535,
and then delivered him into the hands of the officers, sent to apprehend
him as a denounced heretic.
Tyndale was at once conveyed to the
Though great
Castle of Vilvoord, about eighteen miles from Antwerp.
efforts were made for his liberation, they were all ineffectual ; for, after
being confined in prison more than a year, he was brought to trial ; and
" at last,'' says Foxe, " he was condemned by virtue of the Emperor's
decree, made in the assembly at Augsburg ; and upon the same brought
forth to the place of execution ; was there tied to a stake ; and then first
strangled by the hangman, and afterward with fire consumed, in the
morning [*of October 6th], at the town of Vilvoord, in the year 1536,
when he was about the age of fifty-two. Thus much of William Tyndale,
who, for his notable pains and travail, may be worthily called an apostle
of England."

The date in Foxe's Caleri'lar.

See Walter's Biographical Notice, p. Ixxiv, jjrefixud to

the Works of Tyndale, 8vo. 1848.

xxviii

PREFACE.

—

•

Though Ilcnry VIII did not appear to have any connection witli
cariying into effect this arbitrary, unjust and cruel decree, Tyndale

earnestly and with a loud voice prayed at the stake—" Lord ! open the
King of En^^-land's eyes '/^—The prayer of the dying martyr was heard;
for, before the close of 1536, the first volume of the Holy Scriptures in
English ever printed in this country, the folio edition of the "'^ew
Testament, issued from the press of the king's own printer, with the name
of William Tyndale on the title. Nay more, when what is generally
called Matthew's Bible was published in 1537, the king gave his royal
^' Licence that the same may be sold, and read of every person, without
" danger of any act, proclamation, or ordinance heretofore granted to
" the contrary."
This Bible received its designation from the name of
Thomas Matthew being given on the title-page.
It was chiefly a repub-
lication of Tj^idale's version ; but those parts of the Old Testament,
w^hich he did not live to translate, were taken from Coverdale's Bible of
The New Testament of Tjmdale had been in circulation for eleven
1535.
years ; and it w^as the best translation and popular, because the language
Some of the Prologues and notes of Tj-ndale
was familiar to the people.
had been introduced into Matthew's Bible, and given offence and raised
To remove these objections Archbishop Cranmer, with the
opposition.
king's sanction, proposed the publication of the whole Bible without
note or comment. He had the translation of Tyndale copied, and sent
in portions to the Bishops for their correction, and then to be returned
to him for his final revision.
This version was published in 1539, and
is known as Cranmer' s, or the Great BiblCy the first that was authorized
" to be sett up in summe convenyent place within the churche, whereat
the parishners may rede yt."
The Great Bible was the authorized
version in the reign of Henry and Edward; and, after the death of
]\Iary, it was authorized by Elizabeth, and continued in general use till
superseded by the revised edition of 1568 under the superintendence of
Archbishop Parker, assisted by the most learned Bishops, hence called
The first rule, recommended by King James I. in
the Bishops' Bible.
the preparation of our present authorized version of 161 1, was this,
^' The ordinary Bible read in the Church, commonly called the B'h^hnps'
^^ Bible y to be followed, and as little altered as the original will permit."
From this very brief detail, it appears that our present English Version
was based upon the Bishops' Bible of 1568, and that upon Cranmer's of
3539, which was a new edition of Matthew's Bible of 1537, partly from
Coverdale of 1535^ but chiefly from Tyndale; in other words, that our

• A copy is in the Bodleian.

—

—

—

ESTIMATION OF TYNDALE^S VERSION, xxix

present authorized translation is mainly that of Tyndale^ made from
the original Hebrew and Greek.
It has stood the test of the severest
criticism, from his la.&t revision to the present time, without material
alteration ; because Tjndale, having a critical knowledge of Hebrew and
Greek and deep Christian experience, caught the very spirit of the
His
original, and gave the impression of it in plain, idiomatic English.
His translation of the New Testa-
style is easy, correct and vigorous.
ment is a fine specimen of our lang'uage, in what may be called the first
stage of maturity. It is the foundation of our standard translation, which
is also the standard of our language. He avoids Latin derivatives, and
generally uses indig-enous words, the strong and expressive Saxon terms,
known by all the people.
In this respect our version happily follows
Tyndale translates r}\v aydirrjv rod 0eo{!, Lk. xi. 42, t/ie love of
him.
God, which our established version has adopted; but Wycliffe has the
Our translators seldom
charite of God, from the Vulgate charitatem Dei.
depart from Tyndale, but when they do, in a particular word, the spirit
of the passage is often lost; for instance, in i Cor. xiii. 13, Tyndale has,

—Nowe abideth fayth, hope and love, even these thre ; hut the chefe of these

dyaTT?;] .

Love is divine afiection in the soul, for God is love
is love [17 ayaTTry].
Faith in the Saviour is i\\e foundation of good
[nrt 6 0eos ayd-n-q ecrriV] .
works, hope raises the superstructure, and love completes and crowns it
Faith works by love, and love is the fulfilling of the law
in eternity.
The perfection of a good work is, that it
\i:\y]pQi>[ia v6\xov r\
Every Christian knows this to be his ruling prin-
springs from love.
ciple. We have an illustration of it in filial love. How different is the
feeling and conduct of an affectionate child from that of a servant !
The
child, influenced by love, is unwearied in attention, and the only hope is
an increase oi mutual affection ; while the servant^s constraining principle
Thus, while Christian love is
is naturally the hope of material wages.
the constraining principle of action here, and the fulfilling of the law,
when our present ya2V^ is lost in sight, and hope in enjoyment, this dyd-nrj
will continue, and increase throughout eternity.—Now, if this be the
literal and true meaning of St. PauPs Greek; let love be sul^stitutcd for
charity, wherever it occurs in i Cor. xiii., as it is in Tyndale 1526, fol-
lowed by Coverdale 1535, Matthew 1537, Archbishop Cranmer 1539,
and Parker 1568,—and there can be little doubt that love is more in

accordance with the scope of the chapter than chari///, and that Tyndale's
the chefe of these is love, is far better than the Vulgate major
the moost of thes is charite, or

last clause,
horum est charitas, or than Wycliffe's,
even than our version,

the greatest of these is charity.

I

—

XXX

PRE FA C E.

First, and most of all,

Before I close my Preface, I must have the pleasure of alhiding
to the friendly assistance I have received in the preparation and printing
I am deeply indebted to
of these Gospels.
George Waring-, Esq., M.A., of Trinity College, Cambridge, and jMag-
dalen Hall, Oxford, whose contriljutions to Anglo-Saxon philology as
editor, for the Surtees Society, of the Lindisfarne and Rushworth Glosses,
^lany years ago the text of the Gothic
are already before the public.
and Anglo-Saxon Gospels had been very carefully transcribed, and the
Anglo-Saxon collated with the oldest and best MSS. The final re\nsion
had been long deferred in consequence of other pressing engagements
and failing sight, till all impediments were removed in the early part
of 1864 by my friend, who made an arrangement with the Publisher to
take the responsibility of preparing my transcript for the press, and
of harmonizing the division of verses,
seeing it accurately printed:
and the punctuation of the Gothic, Anglo-Saxon, and the translation
of Tyndale with Wycliffe and our authorized version : and of regulating,
as far as possible, the accents, which indicate the long sound of the
Anglo-Saxon vowels over which they are placed.
The accent on
diphthongs is here omitted, except when found in the MSS., as it was
not employed by Dr. Grimm and others to denote the length of the
vowel, but merely to indicate the etymological origin of the accented
Every accent in the Anglo-Saxon text, therefore, denotes the
vowel.
long sound of the vowel over which it is placed, and the di^jhthongs
eo, ea, etc. are accented exactly as in B. or in C.

As the simplicity of Anglo-Saxon accentuation has frequently been over-
looked, or involved in a complicated system, it Nvill tend to remove false im-
pressions, and to make the matter clear, by recollecting that the Anglo-Saxons
only used one accent, which always indicated the long sound of the vowel over
Our comi)licated system of English vowels arose from
which it was placed.
the Norman scribes, who first confused the Anglo-Saxon accents, and then
attempted to supply their place by a multiplicity of vowels, which we have
adopted, as will be seen by the following examples :—Owen a cween, fct feet,
ges geese, etc. :—Die a dike, He like, lim lime, win loine, etc. :—Boc a book, for
fore, hefore, god good, gcs a goose, etc. :— Dii thoti, hii hoiv, bus a house, miis
a mouse, etc. :— Bryd a hride, fyr Jire, mys fiiice.
In all these instances the
Anglo-Saxon is quite plain and consistent, expressing the same sound by the
same accented vowel, while the English employs different vowels for the same
purpose, as in cween, geese ;—good, goose, fore ;
thou, how, house, and mouse.
The greatest complication of vowels is seen in (»ur expression of the long open
sound of 0, heard, in no and bone. We use oe, oa, and o with a silent final e,

ANG.-SAX. ACCENTS: AND p, D.

xxxi

while the Anglo-Saxons, in all cases, merely accented the a, as,—Da a doe, fa
a foe, ta a toe, etc.—Bat a boat, ac an oa^, fam foam, etc.—Ban a bone, staa
a stone, etc.
This superabundant employment of English vowels is troublesome
to natives, and most perplexing to foreigners. On the contrary, the Anglo-
Mr. Waring
Saxon system of accenting the long vowels is plain and dej&nite.
has been guided by these general principles in accenting the Anglo-Saxon, but
Gothic words have not been accented, because not a single accent has been,
Every possible care has, however, been taken to secure
found in Cod. Arg.
the greatest verbal accuracy in the Gothic and Anglo-Saxon texts, as well as

in the other two.

I believe Mr. "Waring has exerted himself to the uttermost to fulfil
his engagement, and I have devoted a far longer time to the work
than I anticipated would be at my disposal.
Neither labour nor expense
has been spared, when either could be profitably employed to benefit
I have, therefore, not only willingly assisted in preparing
the work.
the MS. for the press, collated the B text with the C, but I have
carefully read over every proof twice and the revise once, after being
read in the same manner by Mr. Waring, and by a friend ; every sheet
has, therefore, been carefully read over at least nine times.

Mr. Waring suggested and superintended the placing of ^ and d, or the
hard and soft sound of our modern th, as they are used in all parts of England
Though in our numerous provincial Dialects almost
at the present day.

every letter has a diversity of sounds, I believe there is greater uniformity

in the hard and soft sound of our th,—the Anglo-Saxon ]? and d,— than in
As the true archaism of our good old English and its
any other letters.
nervous energy are retained in the provincial Dialects of our Island*, I have
no doubt the original and genuine hard and soft sounds of the Anglo-Saxon
\> and d have been transmitted to us by the secluded peasantry of our rural
districts, and confirmed by those educated in our Universities and towns.
The only way then of recovering the right sound of \ and d, and of correctly
applying these characters in writing and printing Anglo-Saxon, is to adopt
If the two distinct sounds of our
the true English sound of these letters.
modern th have been faithfully conveyed to us, we only ascend to Anglo-Saxon
times and re-adopt their rational system by using their two distinct characters
The Norman scribes could not distinguish
for these two distinct sounds.
between the hard and soft sound of j? and d ; they therefore, in writing Anglo-
Saxon, confounded them, using the one or the other without any apparent
Some scribes only employed S or d, which is the same letter

distinction.

* See Origin of the English and Germanic Languagen, part iii. § 19, p. 26.

-
;

xxxii

PREFACE.

in a modified form, as in the Rushwortb Gloss, which discards the use of \>
Hence the th for both sounds in
altogether in St. Mark, Luke, and John.
modern English, to the confusion of foreigners.
Our present printed Anglo-
Saxon text, indicating the true, the distinct hard and soft sound of th by ]> and
d, will be a great assistance to foreigners, in showing the correct pronunciation
of th, in English words cognate with the Anglo-Saxon.

The hard, sharp, or acute sound of the English th in thm and sooth, is
represented by -the Anglo-Saxon p and j> ; the soft, flat, or grave sound of TH
in THine and sooTHe is represented by D, d or 6.

For ascertaining the hard and soft sound of th, equally applicable to English

and Anglo-Saxon, are given the following general

Rules.

T. The hard, sharp or acute p or j^, is used in the heginning of all words,

not pronominal, as ))incan to <Aink, j)in thm.

a. And at the end of radical and inflectional terminations, as bae)) a ba/A,

cla}) cXoth, soj) sooth, \nuc]> th'iiikcth.

Except wid wiTii, etc.

b. And sometimes when th is preceded or followed by a consonant, as

emb})encan to thirik about ; e|mes easiness ;

|>ritig thWty.

11. The soft, flat or gi-ave D, d or ^ is used in the heginning of all

pronouns and of all words derived from pronouns, as dait THat ; de THe
daeslic like Tiiis, danonne Tuence, daerdivr Tiiere.

a. Also often between two vowels, as badu baxiis, badian to baTiie, cludum

with cloTHes.

These Rules are in perfect accordance with those given in our best works

on orthoepy.

•

III the printin«»' dopartment, we bave bad tbo most willing- assistance
and co-o])erati()n from all eng-aged in the work at the University Press,
to whom our thanks are due.

To the Master of Corpus Christi Colleg-e, Cambridge, Dr. Pulling',
to the Rev. Henry Octavius Coxe, M. A., Librarian, and to the Assistant
Librarians of the Bodleian, Oxford, I am g-reatly indebted, for the most
ready and friendly assistance, in the consultation and use of MSS. under
Though I had carefully collated the whole of the Bene't, or
their care.
Cori)us MS. of the Ang-lo-Saxon Gospels, with my own copy, in 1832,
and examined it ag-ain in 1841, I have frequently had to consult it
AVhile the stringent regulations, made by Archbishop
since 1850.
Parker, for the preservation of the ^ISS. and printed books left to
Corpus Christi Colleg-e, Cambridgfe, liave been observed, the Master,
Dr. Pulling-, and the Fellows of the College, have had Oie hapi)y art

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF ASSISTANCE.

xxxiii

of giving" every facility, in so friendly a manner as to avoid the least
The same may be said of Dr. Guest,
appearance of conferring a favour.
Master of Caius College, who has most kindly removed doubts by
consulting the MS. My best and most willing acknowledgments are
due to the Rev. J. E. B. Mayor, M.A., Librarian of the University
of Cambridge, and to Henry Bradshaw, Esq., M.A., Fellow of King''s
College, for their ready assistance in procuring a Grace of the Senate
to take out of the Library one of their treasures, the MS. of the
I have, therefore, had the great advantage of
Anglo-Saxon Gospels.
the um'estrained possession and use of this MS. for reference, during
the time the Anglo-Saxon text has been passing through the Oxford
University Press.

Oxford; June 2'jthf 1865.

J. B.

THE CHIEF CONTRACTIONS,

a, after a number, denotes the ri;,'ht
hand page, redo; and b, the left hand
page, ver»o.

a faidlcfttefl the first word in a verse,
6=2, c=3, d—\ etc. to x— 26: ah denote
word« 1 and 2, ed=Z and 4: o-d denote
the wordji from 1 to 4, both incloaive : di
indicate a doable alphabet, L e. 26 letters
of one alphabet, and d=4 of the next,
or 26 + 4=30, the number of the word
Thus, in Notes, p. 571,
In the Terse.
col. ?. l.'>(!=chap, v. verse 15 ; e=5, the
fifth word in verse 19.

Anr. or Arg. r. Cod. Arg.
A. 8. Anglo-Saxon.
B The Bene't or Corp. Chrlsti MS. t.

I-ref. p. xUl. i U

b.v.a.

b, T. a.

Tlie Cambridge MS. v. Pref. p. xiil.

{U.

Cast. Mai, Coont Caatiglione and An-
gelo Mai, v. Notes, p. 571 : v. 3 and
vii. 28«.

Cod. Arg. Codex Argenteua, v. Pref.

p. iv-ix.

Cod. Aug. Codex Aogostinias Bodl. D.

2.11.

Col. Column.
Corp. Corpus Christi Coll. Camb. v. B.
Cot. Gotten, V. Prof. p. xlv. 4 iii.
D.2. ll.v. Cod. Aug.
etc. or ele. el csetera.
FoL or fol. folio or leaf.
5=jf, gh and y.
Ua!i. Ub. Gabelentzand U}be,v. Prof.

p. viii. i vii.

Qrk. Uroek.

H. or Hat. The HattonMS.v. Pref. p. xv.
i. e. id est,
Jn. St. John's Gospel.
Ilk. St. Luko.
Mass. Massman, v. Pref. p. Lx. } x.
Blk. St. Mark.
Mt. St. Matthew.
0. The Oxford MS. v. Pref. p. xvi. ; vl.
Kl. Koyal MS. v. Prof. p. xv. i v.
Bnlh. or Rushw. Eushworth, v. Prof,

p. xvi.

Skelr. Skeiroins, v. Prof. p. viii. ^ vl.
Upps. UppstrOm'a Cod. Arg. 4to. Upp-

sala 1&>4-18:.7, V. Notes, p. 570.
Upps. Frag. Goth. v. Notes, p. 670.
V. vido, 8oe.
V<t. Itnl. Tlio Old Italic Version, ^,

I'rof. p. xi.

w. wonted or omitted In MSS.

xxxW

THE GOTHIC FACSIMILE A.*

Md^' n N T 6 9 A^^ Ai A J^^^T^i ^ M A^^N Am
AFLETIp MANNAM
MD. UNTE
hominibus

YABAI

reniittitis

Enim

xliv.

si

MISSADEDINS

transgressiones

IZE, AFLETIp YAH
eorum,

reinittit

et

i'XviSATTAi'^VAKSAn)^AKhiMiNA^
IZWIS ATTA IZWAR SA UFAR HIMINAM.
vobis

super

pater

vester

coelis.

6

i' tp 9 A K A I w I A )^ ^ ^ 'I' I ^ M A w N A M M I s
Ip YABAI NX AFLETIp MANNAM MIS-
Autem si
SA^edLiNSi'X6Nit}>AnATTAi'2:
SADEDINS
iZE, NI pAU ATTA I Z-
eorum,

hominibus

gressiones

remittitis

neque

trans-

pater

non

ves-

VAKAf^AGTul^MissA^e^iHSixyA
WAR AFLETIp
MISSADEDINS IZWA-

ter

remittit

transgressiones

vest-

M6- ]<.XS: A^4^AWBI<j^6f:ASTAl^HiyAlK
ME. ROS. AppAN BIpE FASTAIp, NI WAIR-

xlv.

tras.

Autem

qimm

jejunatis,

non

fia-

Matt. vi. 14-16, y. Alphabet, p. xxxvi.

ANGLO-SAXON, THE BENET OR CORP. MS. B.f

co5^nunge,
iemp-tation,

nun^e' ac alyr ur or yre'le vo|?licc'; picot)licc' jyi
Witodlice gyl*

alys

ac
yfele
hut loose us from evil.

us

of

soj^lice.
Amen,

Verily,

men

forgyfad
forgive

syuna ]?onne
then
sins,

mannum hyra
their

if
^d yoji^yyaS mannu hypa rynna ]>oh ^oji 5y]'l
ge
Ibrgylp
ye
forgiveth
dorcy. Yc! hdoycnlica ]:<t;t>C|x doy dor^d jyluar
eower
gyltas. j
your
Gy^f ^d rob" lice' ne ^oji^yiraS' mannii. nd doyen yc
Gyf ge
mannum, ne eower fa
men, neither your J(
if
ye
t)cy. nc yoy.^yr'S doy doyjid rynna;
der
ther

eow eowre
your

lieufenlica
heavenly

ianler
father

Jorgiveth you,

eowre
your

forgive not

cow
you,

lorgylad

foro-yld

soothly

synna.

sortlice

guilt.

sins.

ne

ne

se

J

\rrcf p xx\i

THE ANGLO-SAXON FACSIMILE C ||

on coyrnunjc'- ac alyr uy oy yre'le'. roS'lice'-
on

alys us of

costnunge,
Witodlice
56' yoltjiyaS* mannu H€'o|xa vynna* |?onnef yon
ge
for-

mannum

5i|:

gif

forgifad

synna,

sodlice.

heora

)?onne

yfele.

ac

xxxv

"pirot)liccf

se

eower

heofenlica

5i|:eS* dovcjji yd hcoycnlica yct'Cicn
gifed
fseder
zay ^ly ^e! yo'Slicd nd yo|X5i|:aS' mannu- nef doycy,
eower
yc^Xicp. ne! yoji ^yy'S dov c'orjie' yynna- Dvr 5^ byjiaS"
gebyrad ''''''^

cfot^jxcf 51!-
eowre

mannum,

e'ot?
eow

forgifad

sodlice

eow eowre

forgyfd

synna.

Dys

feeder

gil-

ne

tas.

gif

ge

ne

ne

Matt. vi. 13-15, V, Pref. p. xiii. § ii,

WYCLIFFE. D.

yuel amen . ]?at is so be it / forsoj^e
3if 3ee shulen for3eue to men her
synnys : & 3oure heuenly fadir. shal
for3eue to 30U 3oure trespassis / so
J?ely 3if 300 shulen for3eue not to
men :
neif? 3oure fadir shal for3eue
to 30U 3oure synnes. But when 300

Matt. vi. 13-16. Pref. p. xxii.

TYNDALE. E.

lempta-ciou . but delyvre vs ffrom yvell / Amen.

For ad
yff yeshall forgeve other men there treaspases /
youre father i heve shal also forgeve you . but ad
ye wyll not forgeve men there trespases / nomo;:
re shall youre father forgeve youre treaspases.

Moreovre when ye faste / be not sad as the y^
For they disfig-ure there faces / that

pocryts are.
hit myght apere vnto men that they faste.
Veres;
But
ly y say vnto you / they have there rewarde.
thou / whe thou fastest / anoynte thynehecd / fid

Matt. vi. 13-17.

V. Facsimile facing the Title; and Preface, p. vi. vii.

'rcface, p. xiii.

X Verbally, the heavenly Fa/her 0/ ynu.

The verbal English of C is given in the preceding example, marked B.

. xiii. § ii.
. the entire Rubric, in Notes, p. 575, col. i. Matt. vi. i6a.
elongelh to the head of the fast on Wednesday.

|| The (Cambridge MS. :

+ v. Notes, p. 574, col, I ; and
v. Preface,
** The Rubric:
The literal English of this Rubric is, This

xxxn

Form

A
B

6

h

1,1
K
A
M
N

n
n
[H]

|t
S
T
V

k6

GOTHIC.

Sound

Number

A
B
G
D
E
Q
Z
H

I

a

b

g
d

e

q
z

h

P

i

1

k

K
L
L
M m
N n
Y
y
U
u
P

p

t

s

r

R
S
T
W w
F
f
CH ch
WH wh
O

o

I

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

20

30

40

50
60

70
80

90

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

;

Notes on the Gothic Alphabet.

* The Gothic alphabet is evidently
It was first
See

formed from the Greek.
used by Ulphilas about a.d. 360.
Facsimile, and Preface, p. Hi.

* Most of the Gothic letters have the
same sound as their English representa-
tives ; but, as in Greek so in Gothic,
g has always a hard sound, as in give
and g before another g, or before h, has
the sound of n : thus, Lk. i, 1 1, aggilus,
an angel, is pronounced angilus, as the
Grk. &.yy(\os : Lk. v. 21, hagkyan, to
think, is pronounced thankyan.

^ Is represented by our q sounded as
ktv, thus qens a wife, Lk. i. 18, is pro-
nounced kweens.

* Our indefinite th would have been
used, but the A. S. \) was necessary to
distinguish iji from th as separate letters
in such words as athaitands, Lk. vii. 19.

® As ya yea, yuk a yoke.
^ As oy between two consonants.
' The hard ch as the Grk. x-
^ As in wheila while, whan when ; hw
could not be used, as hw occur as separate
letters in hwssopo, pronounced hoyssopo,
Skeir. p. 179.

53: )<.nh = i88: ):AX=537-

Notes on the Anglo-Saxon Alphabet.

Enff.

Ang.-Sax.

Vowels. VoweU.
fa as a in
[se' as ai ii
e as c in met.

m man.
in main

Engr. An^.-Sax.
Vowelt. Vowel*.

o as o in cock,
in coke.
a as
6 as 00 in cook,

u-{ -

e< ffi as ea in meat
e zi ee in nxeei.

as u in iuW.
as ou in iou\.
y in lyfaj>.
y in l_yf life.
}), d, 5 have the sound of tb in /i>ine

as I in w/n.
as / in w/ne.

\y as.
ly as.

i

'

and soo/i>e. See p. xxxii.

and sooth. See p. xxxii.

•' Y, \> have the sound of tb in tb\n
Note— The accent, in Anglo-Saxon,

indicates the long vowels [see notes »>_»
and p. xxx] and nuist not be confounded
with syllabic emphasis, or the stress of the
voice, which falls upon the chief syllable
This emphasis, in Gothic and
in a word.
Anglo-Saxon, is always upon the first
radical syllable of a word, and never
upon prefixes, such as a, be, ge, etc.

ANGLO-SAXON.

Form

Sound

a
3:a
B
b
EC c
DJ) t)
ee eC
FF \
LiG
5
Hb K

I

k

I
k
L
CO A). m
NH n

I

11

P
P
Q
q
R
nF
SX r
Tr r
Z
a
VF vr
^ X
y
y%
7.x z.
J^(X <£
D5 d^'
)? f tlKIt

c

b

d

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H h

f

I

1"

1

k

K
L
INI m
N n
O o«
P P
Q
q

11

r

s

S
T t
U u'

X X
Y y8
Z z
Ai ai^

1 and.

:

THE

FOUR GOSPELS.

GOTHIC:

ANGLO-SAXON: WYCLIFFE:

TYNDALE:

AIWAGGELYO

CRISTES BEG,

DA FEOWER

))airh

MAppAIU,

MARKU, LUKAN,

yah

iOHANNEN :

on

Engliscum

gereorde

THE

GOSPEL

of

MATHEU,

THE

GOSPELL

of

S. MATHEW,

MARK, LUKE,

S. MARKE, S. LUKE,

and

JOON

in Englische :

and

S. IHON :

Translated from
THE GREEK,

Translated from the
VETUS ITALICA,

Translated from the

LATIN VULGATE,

Translated from
THE GREEK,

by

ULPniLAS,

Bishop of

and printed chiefly

from a MS.

Tub Moeso-Goths,

written between

between

A. D. 348 and 388,

about

A. D. 3C0.

A. D. 990 and A. D. 1050 ;

probably about

A. U. 995.

by

by

JOHN AVYCLIFFE,

WILLIAM TTNDALE,

and printed

from

a manuscript,

written

about

A- D. 1389.

and printed

from

the first edition,

publislied

in

A. U. 1526.

B

1

HER ONGIXNEp

AIWAGGELYO^

BMT GODSPELLt

JJAIRII

M A P P A I U

^FTER

MATHEUS GERECEDNYSSE.

Is wanting till Chapter F, 1 5 ; except
a few verses andfragments of verses, the
sources of which are indicated in tJte
notes ^

Chap. I.

i Her is on cncorisse hoc
Haelcndes Cristes, Dauides suna, Abra-
Imincs suna.

2 Sojjlice Abraham gestryiule Isaac.
lacob gestrynde

Isaac gestiynde lacob.
ludani and his gebrodra.

3 ludas gestrynde Phares and Zaram,
of itam wife etc wa3S gencmucd Thaniar.
Esrom ge-
Phares gestiyude Esrom.
strynde Aram.

4 Aram gestrynde Aminadab.

nadab gestrynde Naasou.
stiynde Sahnon.

Ami-
Naason ge-

5 Salmon gestiynde Booz, of dam wife
Booz gestiynde Ubcth, of ttam

Obeth gestiynde lesse.

Raab.
•wife Ruth.

6 lesse gestiynde done cyning Dauid.
Dauid cyning gestrynde Salomon, of dam
wife de wjes Urias wif.

7 Salomon gestiynde Roboam. Eoboas
Abia gestiynde Asa.

gestiynde Abiam.

8 Asa gestrynde losaphath.

losaphnth
gestrynde loram. loras gestiyude 0/iam.

9 Ozias gestrynde loatham.

loatham
gestiynde Achaz. Achaz gestiynde E/.c-
chiam.

JO Ezechias gestiynde Mannascn. Man-
Anion ge-

nases gestrynde Anion.
strynde losiam.

1

losias gestiynde lechoniam and his

gebrodi'U, on Babilonis geleorednysse.

"'' Tiefers to the Chapter and Verse of the Notes
at the aid of the Wihime, hcloiujiiiif
to that
Versiov, and the Word of the Verse after ichich
the t stands.

12 And ff'fter Babilonys geleorednysse,
Salathiel

lechonias gestrynde Salathiel.
gestiynde Zorobabel.

I

1

1

HEEEE BIGTNNETH

THE GOSPEL

OF

M A T H E U.

TFB

GOSPELL

OF

S. MATHEW.

Chap. I.

i The boke of generacioun
of Jhesu Crist, the sone of Dauyd, the
sone of Abraham.

Chap. I.

i Tys is the boke off the
generacion off Jhesus Christ, the sonne
of David, the sonne also ol Abraham.

2 Abraham gendride"'' Ysaac.

forsothe bigate Jacob.
bigate Judas and his bretheren.

Ysaac
Jacob forsothe

3 Judas forsothe bigate Phares and
Phares forsothe
Esrom forsothe bigate

Zaram, of Thamar.
bigate Esrom.
Aram.

4 Aram forsothe bigate Amynadab.
Na-

Amynadab forsothe bigate Nason.
son forsothe bigate Salmon.

5 Salmon forsothe bigate Booz, of Raab.
Booz forsothe bigate Obeth, of Ruth.
Obeth forsothe bigate Gesse.

6 Jesse forsothe bigate Dauiththe kyng.
Dauith forsothe kyng bigate Salomon,
of that womman that was Uries wyf.
7 Salomon forsothe bigate Iloboam.
Abias

Roboam forsothe bigat Abias.
forsothe bigate Asa.

8 Asa forsothe bigate Josophat.

Jo-
Joram

Jo-
Achaz

sophat forsothe bigate Joram.
forsothe bigate Osias.

9 Osias forsothe bigate Joathan.

atlian forsothe bigate Achaz.
forsothe bigate Ezechie.

10 Ezechie forsothe bigate Manasses.
Anion

Manasses forsothe bigate Amon.
forsothe bigate Josias.

1

Josias forsothe bigate Jcchonyas and
his bretlieren, in to transmigracyoun of
Babiloyne.

12 And after the transmygrncyoun of
Babiloyne, Jechoiiias l^igatc Salaticl. Su-
latiel forsothe bigate Zorolmlicl.

2 Abraham begat Isaac.

Isaac begat
Jacob begat Judas and hys

Jacob.
brethren.

3 Judas begat Phares and Zaram, off
Phares begat Esrom. Esrom

Thamar.
begat Aram.

4 Aram begat Aminadab. Aminadab
Naasson begat Salmon.

begat Naassou.

5 Salmon begat Boos, of Rahab. Boos
begat Obed, of Ruth. Obed begat Jesse.

6 Jesse begat David the kynge. David
the kynge begat Solomon, of her that
was the wyfe of Ury.

7 Solomon begat Roboam.
Abia begat Asa.

begat Abia.

Roboam

8 Asa begat Josaphat.

Josaphat begat

Joram.

Joram begat Osias.

9 Osias begat Joatham. Joatham begat

Achas.

Achas begat Ezechias.

10 Ezechias begat Manasses. Manasses

begat Amon. Amon begat Josias.

1

Josias begat Jechonias and hys
brethren, aboute the tyme of the cap-
tivete of ]>ubilon.

12 After

tlicy wcr ledd

ca])tive

lialtiioii, .I(!(;li<)nias b(;gat Salathicl.
latliiel begat Zorobabel.
li 2

to
Sa-

coTirrc, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

13 Zorobabel gestiyiide Abiud. Abiud
gestryudc Eliachim. Eliachiin gestryude
Azor.

14 Azor gestryiide Sadoc.

Sadoc ge-
stryiidc Acliiin. Achim gestrynde Eliud.

15 Eliud gestiyiide Elcazar.

Eleazar
Matlian gesti-ynde

gestrynde Matbaii.
lacob.

17 Eornostlice

16 lacob gestrynde Joseph, Marian
wer, of daere wais acenued se HsGlend,
de is genemned Crist.
ealle

cneoressa fram
Abrahame otl Dauid syud feowertyne
cneoressa, and frani Uauide od Babilo-
nis geleorednysse feowertyne cneoressa,
geleorednesse od
and frani
Crist feowertyne cneoressa^.

Babilonis

21 ... i'J) i^abairij) sunu, yah liaitais

naino is lesu :^

18 S6j)lice dus wses Cristes

encores.
Da da.'s Haelendes modor, Maria, wais
losepe beweddod, ser hi to sonine be-
coniun, heo waes gemet on innode ha^b-
bende of dam Halefjan Gaste.

19 Sol'lice

losep, h}Te wer, da he
waes rihtwis, and nolde hi gewidnia^rsian,
he wokle hi dihlice forlictan.

20 Him da s6|)lice das )nng j)encen-
dum, Drihtnes engel on swefnum a?ty\Yde,
and him to cwa^}?, losep, Dauides sunu,
nelle du ondraedau Marian, dine genuec-
cean, to onfonne ; da3t on liyre ucenned
ys hyt ys of dam Halgan Giiste.

21 WitodHoe heo cenj) sunu, and du
nemst hys naman II a? lend : He s6})lice
hys folc hal gedej) fram hyra synnum.

22 S6|)lice eal dys wjes geworden, da?t
gefylled Vfxre, da^t fram Drihtne ge-
eweden waes jmrli done witegan.

23 Soj'lice ! SCO fa^mnc hivfj) on innode,
and heo cen}> sunu, and hi nemna)) his
naman Emauuhel, da^t ys gereht on lire
gej)code, God mid us.

24 Da aras losep of swcfono, and dyde
swa Drihtnes engel liim behead, and
he on fen g hys gema'ccean ;

25 And he ne grette hi, [od da^t]^ heoi
crnde li\Te frum-cennedan sunu, and
nemde hys naman Haelend."''

8
7

6
8
3

I. 13-25.]

WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

5

13 Zorobabel forsotbe begate Abyut.
Elia-

Abyut forsotbe bygate Eliacbim.
chym forsotbe bigate Asor.

14 Asor forsotbe bigate Sadoc. Sadoc
forsotbe bygate Acbym. Acbym forsotbe
bygate Elyut.

15 Elyut forsotbe bygate Eleasar. Elea-
Mathan

sar forsotbe bigate Matban.
forsotbe bigate Jacob.

16 Jacob forsotbe bigate Josepb, tbe
busbond of Marie, of wbicbe Marie Jesus
is born, tbat is clepid Crist.

1

And so alle generaciouns from Abra-
ham til to Dauitb hen fourtene gene-
raciouns, and fro Dauitb vnto trans-
mygracioun of Babiloyne hen fourtene
generaciouns, and from tbe transmygra-
cioun of Babiloyne vnto Crist hen four-
tene generaciouns.

1

Forsotb tbe generacioun of Crist was
Wbane Marie, his modir, was
thus.
spousid to Joseph, bifore that tbei shul-
den come to gidre, she is foundun hau-
ynge in the wombe of the Holy Gost.

19 Josepb forsothe, bir busbond, when
he was iust man,"*" and wolde not pup-
liche'*' bir, wolde priuyly forsake hire.

20

Sothely hym thenkynge

these
tbingus, lo ! the angel of the Lord ape-
ride in sleepe'*' to hym, sayinge, Joseph,
tlie sone of Dauyd, nyl thou drede to
take Marie, thi wyf ; forsothe that thing
that is bom in hire is of the Holy Goost.
21 Sothely she shal here a sone, and
thou sbalt clepe his name Jesus ; for he
shal make his peple saif fro her synnes.

22 Forsothe al this thing was don, that
it sbulde be fulfil lid, that thing that was
seid })y a prophctc, seiynge,

23 Loo ! a virgyne shal haue inwombe,
and she shal here a sone, and liis name
BJial be clepid Emanuel, tbat is inter-
prctid,^ God with us.

24 Sotliely JoHcpli rj'synge vp fro sloop,
did as the angel of the Lord coniaundide
hym, and tokc liis wijf ;

25 And bo kncwc liir nat, til she liad
boron bir first bygoten sone, and clopidc
his name Jhesus.

I

1

Zorobabel begat Abiud.

Abiud be-

gat Eliacbim.

Eliacbim begat Azor.

14 Azor begat Sadoc.

Sadoc begat

Achin.

Achin begat Eliud.

15 Eliud begat Eleasar.

Eleasar be-

gat Matthan.

Mattban begat Jacob.

1

Jacob begat Joseph, the husbande
off Mary, of whome was boren tbat Jhe-
sus, which is called Christ.

17 All the generacions from Abraham
to David are fowretene generacions,
and from David vnto the captivete of
Babilon are fowrtene generacions, and
from tbe captivete
of Babilon vnto
Christ are also fowrtene generacions.

1

Tbe byrthe off Christe was on thys
wyse. When bys mother, Mary, was
maryed vnto Joseph, before they cam to
dwell togedder, she was founde with
chylde by the Holy Goost.

19 Then her husbande, Josepb, beinge
a parfect man, and loth to defame her,
was mynded to put her awaye secretly.

20 Whill he thus thought, behold ! the
angell of the Lord apered vnto him
in slepe, sainge, Joseph, the sonne of
David, feare not to take vnto the Mary,
thy wyfe ; for that which is conceaved
in her is of the Holy Goost.

21 She shall brynge forthe a sonne,
and thou sbalt call his name Jesus ; for
he shall save bis people from theire
synnes.

22 All thys was done to fulfill that
which was spoken of the lordo be the
prophet, saynge,

23 Beboldc !

a mayde shalbe with
chylde, and shall brynge forthe a sonne,
and they shall call bis name Eniiinuol,
which is as moche to suye be interpreta-
cion, as God with vs.

24 Josepb as sone as he awoke out
of slope, did as the angcU off tbe Lordo
bade him, and tokc bys wyfe vnto hym ;
25 And knowe lior not, tyll slie had
l)n)Uglit forth bor fyrst sonne, and called
bys name Jesus.

6

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

1

Chap. II.

i EornustHce da se Haelend
acenncd waes on ludciscre Bethleem, on
daes cyninges dagum Herodes, da comon
da tunfrol-^viteJran fram east-ditle
to
Hierusalem,

2 And cwsedon, Hwser ys se, ludea
cyiiing de'acenued ys? s5|)lice we ge-
sawon hys steorran on east-deele, and we
comon us him to ge-eadmudenne.
3 Da Herodes diet gebyrde da wearj>
he gedrefed, and eal Hierosolim-waru
mid him.

4 And da, gegaderode Herodes ealle
ealdras daera sacerda, and folces writeras,
and axode, hwser Crist acenned waere.

5 Da ssedon hi hira, On ludelscere
Betlilem ; witodlice dus ys awriten j)urh
done witegan,

6 And dii, Bethleem, ludca land, witod-
lice ne cart du laest on luda ealdrum ;
of de forj)-gse|> se here-toga, se de rec)>
min folc Israhel.

7 Herodes da cl}'pode on sunder-
sprsece da tungel-witegan, and befraii hi
georne hwaenne se steorra him a>teowde.
8 And he asende hi to Bethlem, and
dus cwje}>, Fara}), and axia}> geornlice be
dam cilde, and donne ge h}i; gemeta}),
cyc1a]> eft me, doet ic cume and me to
him gebidde.

9 Da hi daet gebod gehyrdon, da fer-
don hi. And 86[)lice !
se steorra, de hi
on east-dsele gesawon, him beforan ferdc,
od he stod ofer, daer dat cild wa^s.

10 S6.}>lice da, da tungel-witegan done
ftugeuodon

gesawon,

steorran
swyde myclum gcfean.

[hig] ^

1

And ganggcnde into dam huse, hi
gemctton d«t cild mid Marian, liys mc-
der ; and hi a|)enedon hi, and hi to him
And hi untyndon h}Ta gold-
gebcxdon.
hordas, and him lac brohton, diet wais
gold, and recels, and myrre.

12 And hi afengon andsware on swef-
nuin, da^t hi eft to TIcrode ne hwyrfdon,
ac hi on odernc weg on hyra rice ferdon.^

13 Da hi da ferdon, d5 aetywde Drihtnes

1

!

II. I-I3.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

Chap. II.

i Therfore when Jliesus
was born in Bethlem of Juda, in the days
of k}Tig Herode, loo ! kyngis^ camen fro
the eest to Jerusalem,

2 Sayinge, Wher is he, that is borun
kyng of Jewis 1 forsothe we han seyn his
sterre in the este, and we comen for to
wirshipe hym.

3 Sothely kyng Herode herynge is

trublid, and al Jerusalem with him.

4 And he, gedrynge to gidre alle the
princis of prestis, and scribis of the peple,
enquiride of hem, wher Crist shulde be
borun.

5 And thei seiden to hym. In Bethlem
of Juda ; for so it is writen bi a pro-
phete,

6 And thou, Bethlem, the lond of Juda,
thou art nat the leste in the princis
of Juda ; for of thee a duk shal gon out,
that shal gouerne my peple of Yrael.

7 Than Herode, priuyli the kyngis
clepid to hym, bisily lernyde of hem the
tyme of the sterre that apperide to hem.
8 And he, sendynge hem in to Beth-
lem, saide, Go 5ee, and axe 5ee bisily of
the chyld, and whan 3ee han founden,
telle a5ein to me, that and Y cummynge
wirshipe hym.

TYNDALE, 1526.

Chap. II.

7
i When Jesus was borne
in Bethleem a tonne of Jury, in the
tyme of king Herode, beholde ! there
cam wyse men from the est to Jerusalem,

2 Saynge, Wliere is he, that is borne
kynge of the Jues"? we have sene his
starre in the est, and are come to wor-
ship hym.

3 Herode the kynge after he hadd
herde thys was troubled, and all Jerusa-
lem with hym.

4 And he sent for all the chefe prestes,
and scribes off the people, and demaunded
off them, where Christ shulde be borne.

5 They sayde vnto hym. In Bethleem
a tonne of Jury ; for thus it is written
be the prophet,

6 And thou, Bethleem, in the londe
of Jury, shalt not be the leest as per-'
teyninge to the princes of Juda ; for out
of the shal come a captaine, whych
shall govern my people Israhel,
7 Then Herod prevely called the wyse
men, and dyligently enquyred of them
the tyme of the starre that appered.

8 And sent them to Bethleem, saynge,
When ye be come thyder, searche dyli-
gentily for the childe, and when ye
have founde hym, bringe me worde,
that Y maye come and worshippe hym

also.

9 The whiche, when thei hadden herde
the kyng, wenten awey. And loo ! the
sterre, the wliiche thei sayen in este,
weute bifore hem, til that it cummynge
stood aboue, wher the child was.

10 Forsothe thei, seeynge the sterre,

9 When they had herde the kynge,
And lo ! the starre,
they departed.
whych they sawe in the este, went before
tliem, vntyll it cam and stod over the
place, where the chylde was.

10 When they sawe the starre, they

ioyedcn with a ful grctc ioye.

were marveylously gladd.

1

And thei, entrjmge the hous, foun-
den the cliild with Marie, his modir ; and
thei fallyngc doun worshipidcn liym.
And her tresburs opnyd, thei offrcden to
hym 5iftis, gold, encense, and racrre.

12 And answer taken in sleep, that
tlioi sliuldcn not turnc ayin to If erode,
tlici ben turned by un otlicr wey in to
her cuntrec.

13 And when thei hadden gon awcy,

11 And entred into the house, and
founde the childe witliMary, hys mother;
and kncled doune and worsliippod hym.
And opened there treaseures, and offred
unto him gyftes, gold, franckynseucc,
and myr.

12 And after they were warned in
tlior h1('])(!, tliat tlioy Hlmhle not go agcyno
to Jlerod, th(!y retourued into thor awno
countre another way.

13 After that they were departed, lo

8

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

7

;

cngel losepe on swcfnum, and dus cwae}),
A'ris, and nim dret cild and his modor,
and flcoh on Egypta-land, and bco da^r,
od diet ic de secge ; toweard ys, da^t
Herodes sec)) daet cild, to forspillenne.

14 He aras da, and nam daet cild and
his m5dor on niht, and ferde on Egyp-
tum,

15 And waes daer od Herodes for)j-si|)

daet waere gefylled, daet de frara Drihtne
gecweden waes |)urli done witegan, Of
Egyptum ic minne sunu geclypode.

16 Da waes Herodes swyde gebolgen,
fordam de he bepacht waes fram dam
tungel-witegum ; and he aaende da and
ofsloh ealle da cild, de on Bethleem
wseron, and on eallum h}Te gemaci-um,
fram twy-wintrum cilde and biuuau dam,
aefter daere tide de he ge-axode fram
dam tungel-witegum.

Da waes gefylled, daet gecweden waes

1

jjurh Hieremiam, done witegan,

18 Stefn waes on hehnysse gehyred,
wop and mycel |)otorung, Kachel weop
hyre beam, and heo nolde beon gefref-
red, fordam de hi nseron.^

19 S6})lice da Herodes waes forj?faren,
on swefne Drihtncs enfjel

witodlice !
ffitywdc losepe on Egyptum,

20 And dus cwae|>, Aris, and nim daet
cild and his modor, and far on Israhela
land ; nu synd forj>farcne dc da^s cildcs
sawle sohton.

21 He ariis da, and onfcng diet cild
and his modor, and com on Israhela land.

22 Da he gehyrdc daet Archelaus rixode
on ludea J)eode, for daene Herodem, he
ondred dyder to farende. And, on swef-
num gcmynegod, he ferde on Galileisce
daelas ;

23 And he com da and eardode on
du3re ccastre, de is gencmncd Nazareth,
diet wai?re gefylled, diet gecweden wjes
jnirh done witegan, Fordam de he Na-
zarenisc by[) genemned.^

9

9

II. 14-23.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

9

loo ! the aungel of the Lord apperide in
sleep to Joseph, sayynge, Ryse vp, and
take the child and his modir, and flee in
to Egipt, and be thou there, til that I
seye to thee ; sothely it is to cume, that
Herode seeke the child, for to lese hym.
14 The whiche Joseph^ rysynge vp,
toke the chijld and his modir by ny3te,
and wente into Egipt,

15 And was there til to the deth of
Erode ; that it shuld be fulfiUid, that
thing that was said of the Lord by the
prophete, sayinge, Fro Egypt Y haue
clepide my sone.

16 Thanne Erode seeynge that he was
scorned'*' of the kyngis, was gretely
wroth ; and he sendynge slew3 alle the
children, that weren in Bethlem, and in
alle the eendis of it, fro two 3eer age and
with ynne, after the tyme that he hadde
sou3t out of the kyngis.

17 Than it was fulfillide, that thing
that was said by Jeremye, the prophete,
sayinge,
18 A voice is herd an hee3e, weepynge
and myche weilynge, Rachel weepynge
hir sonys, and she wolde not be comfortid,
for thei ben not.

1

Sothely Erode dead, loo ! the an-
gel of the Lord apeeride in sleep to
Joseph in Egipt,

20 Sayinge, Ryse vp, and take the
childe and his modir, and go in to the
lond of Yrael ; for thei that sou3ten the
lijf of the chyld ben dead.

21 The whiche Joseph, rysynge vp,
toke the child and his modir, and cam in
to the lond of Yrael.

22 Forsothe he heerynge that Arche-
laus regnede in Jude for Eroude, his
And lie,
fadir, drcd for to go thidir.
monestid in sleep, wente in to the parties
of Galilee ;

23 And he cummyngc dweltc in a
citec, that is ch'pid Nazareth, tluit it
shulde })C fulfiUid, that thing that is said
by proplietis, For whi lie shul be clepid
of Nazareth.

the angell of the Lorde apered to Joseph
in his slepe, saynge, Aryse, and take the
childe and his mother, and flye in to
Egipte, and abyde there, tyll Y bringe
the worde ; for Herod wyll seke the
chylde, to destroye hym.

14 Then he arose, and toke the chylde
and his mother by night, and departed
in to Egipte,

15 And was there vnto the deeth of
Herod ; to fulfill that which was spoken
of the Lorde by the prophet, which say-
eth. Out of Egipte have Y called my
Sonne.

16 Then Herod perceavynge that he
was moocked off the wyse men, was ex-
ceedynge wroth ; and sent forth and slue
all the chyldren, that were in Betlileem,
and in all the costes there of, as many as
were two yere old and vnder, accordynge
to the tyme which he had diligently
searched oute of the wyse men.

17 Then was fulfilled that which was
spoken be the prophet, Jeremi, saynge,

18 On the hilles was a voyce herde,
mournynge wepynge and greate lamen-
tacion, Rachel wepynge ffbr her chyldren,
and wolde nott be comforted, because
they were not.

1

When Herod was deed, lo ! an angell
off the Lorde apered vnto Joseph in
Egipte,

20 Saynge, Arise, and take the chylde
and his mother, and go in to the londe
of Israhel ; for they are deed which sought
the chyldes deeth.

2T Then he arose vp, and toke the
chylde and his mother, and cam into the
londe of Israhel.

22 But when he herde that Archclaus
did raygne in Jury in tlic roumc off hys
father, Herode, he was afrayde to goo
thether. Notwitlistondynge, after he was
warned in his slepe, he tourned a syde
into the parties off Galile ;

23 And went and dwelt in a cite
called Nazareth, to ffulfill that which was
spoken he the prophetes, lie shalbe called
of Nazareth.

10

GOTHIC, 360.

3 Stibna wopyandins in aii|)iclai, Man-
railitos waurkcij?

weid wig Fruuyins ;
staigos is.

7 .

. Kuni nadre, whas gaiaiknida izwis
j?liuhan faura j>amma anawairjjiu liatiza ?^

.

8 Waurkyaij) nil akran wair|)ata idrci-

9 Yah ni [j)uggkyai)>] qi}>an in izwis,
Attan aigiini Abraham ;
qi|)a auk izwis,
j)atei mag Gii}> us stainara jjaim urraisyan
barna Abrahama. +

I o Ajijjan yu so aqizi at waurtim bagmc
h'gi|> ; all nu bagmc uiibairan'dane akran
god, usmaitada, yah in fon galagyada.^

I T Ik allis izwis daupya in watin, [du
i{) sa afar mis gagganda swin-
idreigai] ;
poza mis Vst, |)izei ik ni im wairj)S [sko-
hans l)airan] ; sah [['an] izwis daupci))
in Ahmin Wcihamma [yah funin].^

4

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

Chap. III.

i On dam dagiim com
lohannes se Fulluhtere, and bodude ou
dam westene ludcjB,

2 And cw?e|j, D6}> dwd-bote, s6|)lice

gcnealacej) heofona rice.

3 Dis ys se, be dam de gecweden ys
})urh Esaiam, done witegan, Ch^piendes
Gegearwia}>
stefn
Drihtnes weg ; d6\> his sidas rihte.

wajs on

westene,

4 Se lohannes witodlice haifde reaf of
olfenda heenim, and fellenne g}Tdcl embe
hys lendenu ; and bys mete waes gajrstap-
an, and wudu hunig.

5 Da ferde to him Hierosolim-wani,
and eal ludea ]>ood, and eal da?t rice
wid geondam lordanen ;

6 And hi wseron gcfuUode on lor-
dane fram him, and hi andettan hyra
synna.

7 S6})lice da he geseh manega dirra
Sunder-halgena, and djeraEiht-wisendra
to his fuUuhte cumende, he cwa^}? to him,
La na^ddrena cyn, hwa ges^^1itelode eow
to fleonne fram dam toweardan yrre ?

8 Eornostlice doj) medemne weastm

dtera dakl-bote,

9 And ne cwedaj) bet^^^lx eow, "We
habbaj) Aliraham us to fanler ; s6|)lice ic
secge eow, diet God ys swa mihtig da^t he
maeg of dysum stanum aweccean Abra-
hamcs beam.

I o Eallunga ys sco a'X to da^ra trcowa
wurtrumum asett ; eornustlice aclc treow
de godne wa'stm ne bring|>, by|> forcorf-
en, and on fyr aworpen.

I I \Vitodl)ce ic eow fullige on wa3-
tere, to da'd-bote ; se de a}fter me to-
werd ys he ys strengra donne ic, da\s
gescy ncom ic wyrde to berenne ; he eow
fulla[) on Halgum Gaste and ou fyre.

12 Da?s faun ys on Iiis handa, and
he afeorma|> his |iyrscel-fldre, and he ge-
gadcra}) his hwjvtc on bis ]»ern ; da ccafii
he forbiernj) on unadwa^scendlicum fyre.^

13 Da com se Iljrlcnd fram Oalilca
to lordane to lohanne, diet he hinc
full ode.

1

lohannes dil s6|)licc forbead him,

;

III. 1-14.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

II

Chap. III.

i In thilke days came
Joon Baptist, prechynge in the desert of
Jude,

2 Sayinge, Do 56 penaunce, for the

kyngdom of heuens shal nei^.^

3 Forsothe this is he, of whom it is
said by Ysaye, the prophete, A voice of a
cryinge in desert, Make ^e redy the
wayes of the Lord ; make 50 ri3tful the
pathes of hym.

4 Forsothe that ilk Joon hadde cloth
of the heeris of cameylis, and a girdil of
skyn aboute his leendis ; sothely his
mete weren locustis, and hony of the
wode.

5 Thanne Jerusalem wente out to hym,
and al Jude, and al the cuntre aboute
Jordan ;

6 And thei weren cristenyd of hym in

Chap. III.

i In those dayes Jhon
the Baptiser cam, and preached in the
wildernes oft' Jury,

2 Saynge, Eepent, the kyngdome of

heven is at honde.

3 This is he, of whom it is spoken be
the prophet, Esay, which sayeth, The
voyce oft' a cryer in wyldernes, Prepare
the Lordes way ; and make hys pathes
strayght.

4 This Jhon had hys garment off" camels
heer, and a gerdell off" a skynne aboute
his loynes ; hys meate was locustes, and
wylde hony.

5 Then went oute to hym Jerusalem,
and all Jury, and all the region rounde
aboute Jordan

6 And were baptised of hym in Jor-

Jordan, knowlechynge there synnes.

dan, knoledging their synnes.

7 Sothely he seeynge many of Phari-
sees and of Saducese commynge to his
bapteme, saide to hem, Generaciouns of
eddris, who shewide to 50U for to flee fro
wrath to cumme 1

7 When he sawe many off* the Phari-
ses and off" the Saduces come to hys bap-
tism, he sayde vnto them,
generacion
of vipers, who hath taught you to fle
from the vengeaunce to come *?

8 Therfore do 3ee worthi fruytis of

8 Brynge forth therefore the frutes

penaunce,
9 And nyl 36 say with ynne ;ou, We
ban the fadir Abraham ; sothely Y saye
to 30U, for whi God is mi3ti to reyse vp
of these stonys the sonys of Abraham.

T o For now the axe is putt to the rote
of the tree ; sothely euery tree that mak-
ith nat good fruyt, shal be kitt doun, and
fihal be sent in to fijr.

11 Forsothe Y cristene 30U in water,
in to penaunce ; forsothe he that is to
cumme after me is strenger than Y, whos
ehou Y am not woitlii to here ; he shal
baptise^ 30W in the Holy Goost and fijr.

12 Whos wynwing cloth^ in his bond,
and ho shal fully dense his corne floore,
and shal godre his come in to his borne ;
but cliafriH he shal brcnne with fyr un-
quenchable.^

r3 Thaiiuo Jliesus came fro Galileo in
to Jordan to Joon, for to be cristned of
Lym.

14 Sootbly Joon forbccd hym, sayingc.

belongynge to repentaunce.

9 And se that ye ons thinke not to
saye in yourselves, We have Abraham to
oure father ; for I say vnto you, that
God is able off" these stones to rayse vp
chyldren vnto Abraham.

10 Even nowe is the ax put vnto the
rote of the trees ; soo that every tree
which bringeth not ff'orthe goode frute,
shalbe hewne doune,and cast into the fyre.
Ill baptise you in water, in token
of repentaunce ; but he that cometh
after me is myghtier then I, whose
shucs I am not worthy to beare ; he shal
baptise you with the Holy Gost and with
fyre.

12 Which bath also his fan in his
bond, and will pourgc his floore, and
g.'idre the whcot into his garner ; and
will burne the chafre with everlastyngc
fyre.

13 Then cam Josus from Gnlih^ into
Joidan to Jhon, flor to be baptised oft'
hym.

14 PiUt Jhon nVjrbadc hym, sayngc, I

12

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

6

;

;

and cwa.')?, Ic sceal fram de beon gefullotl^
and cymst ctii to me 1

15 Da andswarode se Hsclend him
and cwa?|>, Laet nu, dus unc gcdafena|>
eallc rihtwisnesse gcfyllan. Da forlct
he hine.

1

S6}?lice da se Hcclcnd gefullod w.ts,
hraidlice he tistah of dam wa^tere ; and
him wnrdon dajr rihte heofenas ontyn-
ede, and he geseah Godes Gast nider-
stigende swa swa culfran, and wunigcnde
ofer hyne

17 xVnd s6|ilice ! da com stcfn of heof-
enum, and dus cwai|), Her is min se
gecorena suuu, on dam me gelicode.^

CiTAP. IV. I Da wxs se H?clcnd gcl<cd
fram Gastc on westen, da3t lie Wccre fram
deofle costud.

2 And da da he fjeste feowurtig daga
and feo^vnrtig nihta, da ongan hyne
syddan hingrian.

3 And da gencAlsehte se costnigend, ^
and cwajj), Gyf dii Godes sunnu sy, ewe})
dajt das stanas to hlafe gewuidon.

4 Da andswarode se Hjelend. Hit ys
awriten, Ne Icofaj) se man be hlafe tlnum,
ac be selcon worde de of Godes miijte ga^|).

5 Da gebrohte se deofol hine on da
halgan ceastre, and asette hine ofer da^s
temples lieahnesse, and cwae|) to him,

6 Gyf dii Godes sunn eart, {i.send de
donne nyder ; so|)lice hit ys ilwriten, Da^t
he his englum behead be de, d.-vt hig dc
on hyra handum heron, de-la^s de din fob
a}t stiine letsporue.

7 Dii cwie}> se Hfvlend eft to him. Hit
ys awriten, Ne costna dii Drihten dinne
God.

8 Eft se deofol hine genam and la'ddc
hine on swidc hoahne miint, and a^teowde
him oalle middan-eardes ricu, and hyra
wuldor

9 And cwa^j) to him, Ealle djis ic sylle
de, gyf dii feallcnde to me ge-eadmetst.

4

.

.

.

Ni bi hlaib ainana libaiJ

manna, ak bi all waurdc .

...''"

5

.

.

.

yah p^asatida ina ana gib-

lin alhs, yah qaj) du ininia,^

6 Yabai sunns siyais Guj'S, wairp l^nk
dala}>; ganulid Vst auk, ])atei aggiluni
seinaim anabiudij)l)i jnik,yali anahandum
))uk ufliaband, ci wlian ni gastagqyais by
staina fotu j)cinaua.+

Ni fraisais Frauyan Gu)

jjcinana.^

io[panuli] imnia Icsus qa)> .

.

. gamcHd

10 Da cwa?]) se llaileud to him. Gang

;

6

IILi5.—IV. lo.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

!

13

I owe for to be cristned of thee, and
thou commest to me 1

15 Forsothe Jhesus answeringe saide
to hym, Suffre now, for so it becummeth
Than
vs for to fulfill e all ri5twisnesse.
Joon leete hym.^

16 Forsothe Jhesus cristened afcei^ vp
anoon fro the water ; and loo ! heuens
ben opened to hym, and he say the Spirit
of God cummynge doun as a culuer, and
cummynge vpon hym

ought to be baptysed off the, and com-
mest thou too me 1

15 Jesus answered and sayde to hym,
Lett hyt be so nowe, for thus hit becom-
meth us to fulfyll all rightewesnes. Then
he suffred hym.

1

And Jesus as sone as he was baptised
cam strayght out of the water ; and lo
heven was open vnto hym, and he sawe
the Spirite of God descende lyke a dove,
and lyght vppon hym ;

] 7 And loo ! a voice fro heuenes, say-
inge, This is my byloued sone, in the
whiche Y haue plesid to me.

17 And lo ! there cam a voice from
heven, sayng, Thys ys my deare sonne,
in whom is my delyte.

Chap. IV.

i Thanne Jhesus was led
in to desert of a spirit, that he shulde be
temptid of the deuel.

2 And whanne he hadde fastid fourty
days and fourety ni3tis, afterward he
hungride.

3 And the tempter cummynge ni3,
saide to hym, 3if thou be Goddis sone,
say that these stoons be maad looues.

4 The whiche answerynge said to hym,
It is wryten, A man lyueth not in breed
aloon, Ijot in euery word that cometh
forth fro the raouthe of God.

5 Thanne the deuyl toke hym in to
an hooly citee, and sette hym on the
pynacle of the temple, and saide to hym,
6 3if thou be Goddis sone, sende thee
doun ; sothely it is wryten. For to his
aungels he comaundide of thee, and thei
shulden take thee in hoondis, lest pera-
uenture thou hurte thi fote at a stoon.

7 Eftsone Jhesus saith to hym, It is
writen, Thou shalt not tempte the Lord
thi Ciod.

8 Eftsone the deucl toke hym in to a
ful hco3 liill, an(l shcwido to hym alle the
rewiiiys of the world, and the gloric of
Ijem ;

9 And saide to hym, Allc these thingis
Y shal 3cue to thcc, ^if tliou fully nge
doun Hhult worshipe mc.

10 Tlian Jhesus saide to hym, Go,

Chap. IV.

i Then was Jesus ledd
awaye of the spirite in to a desert, to be
tempted of the devyll.

2 And when he had fasted fourtye
dayes and fourtye nyghtes, att the last
he was an hungred.

3 Then came vntyll hym the tempter,
and sayde, YfF thou be the sonne of God,
commande that these stones be made
bred.

4 He answered and sayde, Yt is wryt-
ten, Man shall nott live only by breede,
but by every worde that proceadeth out
off the mouth off God.

5 Then the devyll tooke him vpp in
to the holy cite, and set hym on a pyna-
cle of the temple, and sayd vnto hym,

6 Yf thou be the sonne of God, cast
thysylfe doune ; for hit ys wrytten. He
shall geve his angels charge over the,
and with there handes the shall stey
the vpp, that thou dashe not thy fote
agaynst a stone.

7 Jesus sayde to hym, Hit ys wrytten
also. Thou shalt not tempte thy Lordc
God.
8 The devyll toke hym up agaync and
k'dde hym in toan cxcedynge hycmoun-
tayne, and shewed hym al the kyngdonies
of the worldc, and the beauty of them ;

9 And sayde vnto hym, All

tliose
will I g(!vc the, iff thou wilt fuuU dounc
and worsliip me.

I o Then sayde Jesus vnto bym, Avoyd

14

GOTHIC, ^6o.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

5
4
1

i'st, [Auk] Frauyaii Gii}) |)einana inweit-
ais, yah imma aiuamma fullafahyais. ^

(Ill sceocca onba^c ; s6))lice hit ys awritcn,
To Drihtne dinum Gode du de jrc-cad-
metsj?, and liini anum |)eowast.

1

Da forlet se dcofol hine ; and englas

genealaehton, and liiin jjeuodou.^

12 S6|)lice da se Haelcnd gchyrde da?t
lohanncs belaewed wais, da furde he to
Galileam.

13 And forlaetenrc da^re ccastre Na-
zareth, he com, and eardode on Caphar-
naum, on dam sae-gemacrura, on endum
Zabulon and Neptalim,

1

IDset waere gefyllcd, daet de gecwed-

en wses jjurh Esaiam, done wtegan,

1

• [Zabulones eorj^u and NcptaHmes
eor|)e, sses weg ofer lordanc, dara })eoda
Galilea,]

16 peoda-folc de on jn'strum sa}t gcscah
mycel leoht, and sittendum on gcarde
deajjes sceade, is leoht up-aspmngen.

77.. .

I(lrei*go]>, atncwliida sik

j)iudangardi himiiie. ^

18 ... AVharl)onds \>an faur marcin Ga-
leihiias, gasawh twans brojn'uns, Seimona,
Paitrus, yah Andraian,
[saei
brojiar is, wairpandans nati in marein ;
wcsun auk fiskyans.

licitada]

19 Yah (|a}> im [lesus], Hiryats afar

mis, yah gatauya 'ig(iis nutans mannc,"^

20 [i|)

j>ai]

sunsaiw aflctandans

|>o

17 Syddan ongan se Haelend bodian,
and cwedan, T>6\) dced-b5te, soj'lice heof-
ona rice genealsecj)/''

18 Da se Haelend code "vvid da CJali-
leiscean sse, he geseli twegen gebrodru,
Simoncm, se wa's genemncd Petrus, and
Andream, his brodor, sendende hyra nctt
on da S3e ;

S(3|>lice hi waeron fisceras.

19 And he saede him, Cumaj) after
•me, and ic do diet gyt hQo\> manna
fisceras.

20 And hi dner rihte forleton hjTa net.

natya, hiistidcdun afar i'mina.

and him fyligdon.

franiis

is,

21 Yali inuLjaggans

yainjiro,
gasawli [anjiarans twans broj^nins,] la-
kol)U ))ana Zail)aidaiaus, yali lohannon,
in skipa [nii{) Zaibaidaiau,
bro|nir
attin scinamma, manwyandans natya
[scina], yah haihait "ins.

22 i|) |)ai sunsaiw allctandiins |iata skip
afar

scinana, [hiistidodun]

yali nttan

iiiiiua/

21 And da he danon code, he geseh
twegen odre gebr5di'u, lacobum Zebedei,
and loannem, his br(3dur, on scype mid
hyra fanler, Zebedco, rcmigende hyra
net, and he clypode hi.

22 Hi da sona forleton hyra iictt and

hyra fabler, and him fyligdon.^

23 And dji beferde se Hivlcnd oalle
Galileain, laM'endoon hyra jrcsomiiunLrum.
and he wajs bodiende godspel dies rices,
and hielende a'lco adle, and selceuntrum-
nysse on dam folce.

24 And da ferde his hlisa into ealle
Syriam ; and hi brohton him ealle yfel-

2
1
1

4
1

IV. 11-24.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

15

Sathanas ; forsothe it is wrytin, Thou
shalt worshipe the Lord thi God, and to
hyra alone thou shalt serue.

1

Than the deuel lafte hym ; and
loo ! aungelis camen ni^e, and serueden
to hym.

1

Sothely whanne Jhesus hadde herde
that Joon was taken, he wente into
Galilee.

13 And the cite of Nazaret laft, he
came, and dwelte in the citee of Capber-
naum, beside the see, in the eendis of
Zabulon and Neptalym,

14 That it shulde be fulfillid, that
thing that was said by Ysay, the pro-
phete,

15 The lond of Zabulon and the lond
of Neptalym, the weye of the see ouer
Jordan, of Galilee of hethene men,

16 The peple that dwelte in derknes-
sis say grete li3t, and men sittynge in
the cuntree of shadew of deth, li3t is
sprunge to hem.

17 Fro thennus Jhesus bygan for to
preche, and say, Do 5e penaunce, forsothe
the kyngdom of heuens shal cume ni3e.

18 Sothely Jhesus, walkynge bisidis
the see of Galilee, say two bretheren,
Symon, that is clepid Petre, and Andrew,
his brother, sendynge nett in to the see ;
forsothe thei weren fisheris.

19 And he saide to hem. Come ^e
after me, and I shal make 30U to be maad
fisheris of men.

20 And anon her nettis forsakyn, they

sueden hym.

2

And he goynge forth fro that place,
say tweyn other bretheren, Jamys of
Zebedee, and Joon, liis brotlier, in the
sliip with Zebedee, her fadir, makynge
a3ein^ her nettis, and he clepide hem.

22 Sothely anoon the nettis forsaken

and the fadir, thei suedeu hym.

23 And Jhesus cnuyraunyde al Ga-
lilee, techynge in the synagogis of licm,
and ])recliynge the gospel of kyngdum,
and helynge ul sorow,^ and ul sekeuesse
in the j)('i>le.

24 And his opynyouu^ wente in to al
Syrie ; and tliei offriden to liym alle mPM

is written, Thou shalt
Satan ; for it
worshyp thy Lorde God, and hym only
shalt thou serve.

1

Then the dyvell left hym ; and lo !
the angels cam, and ministred vnto hym.

12 When Jesus had herde that Jhou

was taken, he departed in to Galile.

13 And left Nazareth, and went, and
dwelte in Capernaum, which is a cite
apon the see, in the coostes off Zabulon
and Neptalim,

1

To ffulfill that whiche was spoken be

Esay, the prophet, saynge,

15 Beholde the londe of Zabulon and
Neptalim, the waye of the see beyonde
Jordan, Galile off the Gentyls,

16 The people whiche sat in dercknes
sawe greate lyght, and to them which
sate in the region and shadowe of deeth,
lyght is spronge.

17 From thatt tyme Jesus began to
preache, and to say. Repent, for the
kingdome of heven is at honde.

18 As Jesus walked by the see off
Galile, he sawe two brethren, Simon,
which was called Peter, and Andrew, his
brother, castynge a neet into the see ;
for they were fisshers.

19 And he sayde unto them, Folowe
me, and I will make you fisshers of men.

20 And they strayght waye lefte there

nettes, and folowed hym.

21 And he went forthe from thence,
and sawe other twoo brethren, James the
Sonne of Zebede, and Jhon, his brother,
in the shippe with Zcbcdc, their father,
mendynge their nettes, and called them.

22 And they with out taryingc leftc
the shyp and their father, and foloAved
hym.

23 And Jesus went aboute all Galile,
teachyng yn tlieir sinugoges, and i)reach-
ynge the gospell of the kyngdomc, and
liealinge all manncT of sicknes, and all
manner dyscases amonge the people,

24 And hys

spreed al)roode
tlirough oute all Siria ; and they brought

ffame

16

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. ^Fatt.

1

hsel>l)cnde missenlicum adlum, and on
tintregum gegripene, and da de deofel-
scocnyssa ha3fdon, and nionod-seoce, and
laraan ; and he da gebaelde.

25 And him fyligdon mycele menigu
fram Galilca, and fram Dcc-apoli, and
frani Hierusaleni, and fram ludea, and
fram begeondan lordancu.^

Chap. V.

i S6)ilice da so Hjrlend
geseh da menigu, he astah on done muiit ;
and da he saet, da genealuGhton his Icorn-
ing-cnihtas to him.

2 And he ontynde his muj), and hcrde

hi, and cwa^j),

3 Eadige s^ud^ da gastlican Jjearfan,

fordam hyra ys heofena rice.

5 Eadige synd da lijjan, fordam de hi

eor})an agun.

4 Eadige synd da de nu wepajj, fordam

de hi beojj gefrefrede.''"

6 Eadige synd da de for rihtwisnesse
hingriaj) and |>}Tstaj>, fordam de hi beo})
gefyllcde.

7 Eadige synd da mild-heortan, for-

dam de hi mild-heortnysse begjta}?.

8 Eadige synd da clien-hcortan, for-

dam de hi God geseo|).

9 Eadige synd da gesybsuman, for-
dam de hi beoj) Godes beam genemnede.

10 Eadige synd da de ehtnysse )>olia))
for rihtwisnysse, fordam de hyra ys heof-
onan rice.

3 Audagal ]>&{ unledans ulimin, unte

[ize] Tst ]?iudangardi liimine.^

8 Aiidagai ]>ai lirainyaliairtans, unte

jmi Guj) gasaiwliaud.^

1

Eadige synd ge, donne hi vyi-ial)
aelc

eow, and ehta|> eow, and secgea|j
yfel ongen eow leogende, for me,

12 Geblissia|) and gef!i^gnia|>, fordam
de eower med ys mycel on heofonum ;
swa hi ehtun da witegan de beforan cow
WEcron.

13 Ge synd eor)ian sealt ; gyf daet
scalt aw)T}i, on 4i^m de hit gesylt bij??
Hit ne mwg syddan to nahte, buton

13 [Yus siyii|>]

i|> ya-
l);ii salt baud waiij>i|), who gasupoda ? ^. .

salt

[air|^os] ;

1

1

iV. 25.-V. 13.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

hauynge yuele, takyn with clyiiers sorowis
and tourmentis, and liem that hadden
deuelis, and lunatijk men, and men in
palsie, and he helide hem.

25 And there sueden hym many cum-
panyes of Galilee, and of Decapoly, and
of Jerusalem, and of Judee, and of be-
xonde Jordan.

TYNDALE, 1526.

17
vnto hym all sicke people, that were
taken with divers diseases and gripinges,
and them that were possessed with
devils, and those which were lunatyke,
and those that had the palsey, and he
healed them.

25 And there folowed hym a greate
nombre off people from Gallic, and from
the ten cites, and from Jerusalem, and
from Jury, and from the regions that lye
beyonde Jordan.

Chap. V.

i Jhesus forsothe, seynge
cumpanyes, wente vp in to an hill ; and
when he hadde sete, his disciplis camen
ni3e to hym.

2 And he, openynge his mouthe, tau3te

Chap. V.

i When he sawe the peo-
ple, he went vp into a mountayne ; and
when he was set, his disciples cam vnto
hym.

2 And he openned his mought, and

to hem, sayinge,

taught them, saynge,

3 Blessid he the pore in spirit, for the

3 Blessed are the poore in sprete, for

kingdam in heuenes is lieren.

theirs is the kyngdome off heven.

5 Blessid he mylde men, for thei shuln

4 Blessed are they that morne, for they

welde the eerthe.

shalbe comforted.

4 Blessid he thei that mournen, for thei

5 Blessed are the meke, for they shall

shuln be comfortid.^

inheret the erth.

6 Blessid he thei that hunofren and
thnsten ri5twisnesse, for thei shuln ben
fulfillid.

6 Blessed are they which honger and
thurst for rightewesnes, for they shalbe

filled.

7

Blessid he mercyful men, for thei

7 Blessed are the mercifuU, for they

shuln gete mercye.

shall obteyne mercy.

8 Blessid he thei that ben of clene

8 Blessed are the pure in herte, for

herte, for thei shuln see God.

they shall se God.

9 Blessid he pesible men, for thei shuln

be clcpid the sonys of God.

10 Blessid he thei that suffren perse-
cucioun for ri3tvvisnesse, for the kyngdara
of heuenes is herun.

1

3ee shulen be blessid, when men
shulcn curse 30U, and shulen pursue 30U,
and shulen sayalyuel a^eins 50U lec3ing,
for me.

12 loye 3ce with yn fortli, and glade
jee with out forth, for ^oure meede is
plenteuouse in lieuenes ; forsothe so thei
han pursued and proplictis that wcren
before 30U.

13 3^'t; ben salt of tlic crthe ; that 3if
the salt shal vanyshe awcy, wlicrynne
To uo thing it is
sbal it be sultid ?

9 Blessed are the maynteyners of peace,
for they shalbe called the chyldren of
God.

10 Blessed are they which suff're per-
secucion for rightewesnes sake, for theirs
ys the kyngdome off heven.

1

Blessed are ye, when men shall re-
vyle you, and persecute you, and shall
falsly say all manner of yvell saynges
agaynst you, ffbr iny sake.

I 2 lleioyce, and be glad, for greate is
yourc rewarde in heven ; forso ])ersccutcd
they the pi-ophets wliicli were before
youre duyes.

13 Ye arc the salt of the crthc ; but
and if the salt 1)C once vnsavery, wimt
It is thencc-
can be salted ther with?
c

18

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

7

;

;

daet hit sy ut-aworpen, and sy fram mann-
um foitreden.

14 Ge synd middan-eardes leoht ; ne
maeg seo eeaster beon behyd cle by})
uppan munt aset

15 Ne hi ne aclaj) h}Ta leoht-fiet, and
hit under cyfe setta|i, ac ofer candel-stief,
daet hit onlihte eallum dam de on dam
huse synd.

16 Swa onlihte eower leoht beforan
mannum, doet hi geseon eowre godan
weorc, and wuldrian eowerne faeder de
on heofonum ys.^

1

Nelle ge wenan daet ic come towurp-
an da se, odde da witegan ; ne com ic
na towurpan, ac gefyllan.

18 S6)ies on eornost ic

secge cow,
scrdam de gewite heofon and eor|>e, an i,
odde an prica, ne ge^^^t fram da^re ae,
serdam ealle |>ing gewurdan.

19 Eornostlice' se de towyrp}> an of
dysum laestum bebodum, and da men
swa laerj), se by}) laest geuemned on hcof-
s6})lice se de hit dv\\ and
onan rice ;
\icv\>, se bi}> mycel genemned on heofonan
rice.^

20 So}'bce ic secge eow, biiton eower
rihtwisnys mare sy donne da;ra writera
and Sundor-halgena, ne ga ge on heof-
onan rice.

21 Ge gehyrdon dnet gecweden wnes
on ealdum tidum, Ne ofslch dii ; se de
ofslih}>, se by}i dome scyldig.

22 Ic secge eow, B6})lice da^t selc de

yrsa}> hys bivder, by}) dome soyhlig
s6|'lioe, se de seg|» hys breder, Dil jiword-
ena, he h\\> ge})eahte scyldig ; se de seg}),
Du stunta, se hy\> scyldig belle fyrcs.

15

ak ana lukarnasta])-
in, yah liulitei|> ^ allaim j>aim in J^amma
garda.

16 Swa liuhtyai liuhaj) "izwar in and-
wair))ya mannc, ei gasaiwliaina izwara
goda waurstwa, yah liauhyaina attan
izwarana jiana in himinam.

17 Ni hugyai}? ei

qeniyau gatairan
wito|7, ai}?})au ])raufetuus j ni qam ga-
tairan, ak usfullyan.

18 Amen auk qi}m i'zwis, und |>atei
uslei|)i|) himins yah airj^a, yota ains, ai}>-
usleij>i|) af witoda,
j)au ains striks,
uute aHata Avair})ijj.

ni

19 1|> saei nu gatairij) aina anabusne
yv/.o minnistono, yah laisyai swa mans,
minnista haitada in j>iudangardyai him-
i|) sau taiiyi|^, yah laisyai swa, sah
inc ;
mikils haitada in |)iudangardyai himine.

20 Qij)a auk izwis, })atei nibai manag-
izo wair})i)) izwaraizos garaihteins j)au
))izc bokarye yali Fareisaie, ni |)au qiniij?
in |)iudangardyai himine.

21 HausideduJ) |)atei

aiiizam, Ni maur|)ryais ;
ei{), skuhi wairj)i)) stauai.

ist

qi|)an

{'aim
ijj saei maurj^r-

22 A}>))an ik q\\>& izwis, jjatei whazuh
modags bro))r seinamma sware, skula
\vair|)i}) stauai ;
i|) saei (jil^l) bro|n' sein-
amma, lUika, skuhi wair|)i|) ga(|um|>ai ;
a|)|>an saei qij'il>, Dwala, skuhi wair|)i|)
in gaiainnau fuuiiis.

23 Yabai nu bairais aibrj^eindu liunsl-
nstada. yal» yainar ganumeis, jnitci broj)-
ar jieins hal)ai)> wha bi ))uk,

23 Eornostlice gyf dii bringst dine lac
to weofodc, and dii da«r gcl^eiicgst, diet
din brodor hajfj) icnig }>iiig agcn de.

24 Aflet yainav |'o giba |)eina in and-
wair|)ya luinshistaihs, yah gagg faur|)is
gasibyon l)i-o|)r )>einamma, yah bi|)C at-
gaggands atbair )io giba j)eiiia.

24 La't da?r dine lac beforan dam al-
tiire, and gang ser and gesybsuma wid
dinne broder, and donne cum dii syddan
and bring dine lac.^

7

;

7

V. 14-24]

WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

19

worth ouer, no bot that it be sent out,
and defoulid of men.

14 3e ben li^t of the world; a citee

putt on an hill may nat be hid

15 Nether men tendyn a lanterne, and
putten it vndir a busshel, but on a can-
dilstike, that it jeue li3t to alle that ben
in the hous.

16 So shyyne ^oure li3t before men,
that thei see 30ure good werkis, and glo-
rifie 30ure fadir that is in heuens.

1

Nyle 5e gesse '^ that Y came to
vndo''' the lawe, or the prophetis ; I came
not to vndo the lawe, but to fulfille.

18 Forsothe I say to 50U trewthe, til
heuen and erthe passe, oon i^, or titil,
shal nat passe fro the lawe, til alle thingis
be don.

19 Therfore he that vndoth^ oon of
these leste maundementis, and techith
thus men, shal be clepid the leste in the
rewme of heuenes ; forsothe this that
doth, and techith, shal be clepid grete in
the kyngdame of heuenes.

20 Forsothe Y say to 30U, no but 5if
3oure ri3t^visnesse shal be more plenteu-
ouse than of scribis and Pharisees, 5ee
shulen not entreinto kyngdam of heuenes.
is said to
olde men, Thou shal nat slea ; forsothe
he that sleeth, shal be gylty of dome.

21 3ee han herde that it

2 2 But I say to 30U, that euereche that
is wrothe to his brother, shal be gylty
of dome ; forsothe, he that shal say to his
brother, Racha^, shal be gylty of coun-
say, Foor,
scile ; sothly he that shal
shal be gylti of the fijr of helle.

23 Therfore 3if thou offrist thi 3ift at
the auter, and there shalt bytheiike, that
thi brother hath sum what a3eins thee,

24 Lecue there thi 3ift before the au-
ter, and go first for to be recouiiscilid to
thi brotlier, and thanne thou cummynge
shalt offrc tlii 3ift('.

forthe goode for nothynge, but to be cast
oute at the dores, and that men treade it
vnder fete.

14 Ye are the light of the worlde ; a
cite that is set on an hill cannot be hid ;

15 Nether do men lyght a candell, and
put it vnder a busshell, but on a candel-
stick, and it lighteth all them which are
in the housse.

16 Se that youre light so shyne before
men, that they maye se youre good
workes, and glorify youre father which
is in heven.

1

Ye shall not thynke that I am come
to disanull the lawe, or the prophets ; no
I am nott come to disanull them, but to
fulfyll them.

J 8 For truely I saye vnto you, till
heven and erth perisshe, one iott, or one
tytle, of the lawe shall not scape, tyll all
be fulfilled.

19 Whosoever breaketh one of these lest
comaundmentes, and shall teache men
so, he shalbe called the leest in the kyng-
dome off heven ; but whosoever shall
observe, and teache them, that persone
shalbe called greate in the kyngdome off
heven.

20 For I saye vnto you, except youre
rightewesnes excede the rightewesnes off
the scribes and Pharises, ye cannot en-
tre into the kyngdome off heven.

21 Ye have herde howe it was sayd
vnto them off the olde tyme, Thou shalt
not kyll ; whosoever shall kyll, shalbe in
dauntjer of iudfjement.

2 2 But I say vnto you, whosoever his
angre with hys brother, shalbe in daun-
ger off iudgement ; whosoever shall saye
vnto
in
daunger off a counscll ; but whosoever
shall saye vnto his brother, Thou fole,
shalbe in daunger off hell fyre.

brother,

his

Racha,

shalbe

23 Therfore when thou offerest thy
gyftc att tlie altre, and there remem])rt'st,
that thy brother hath cny thynge agaynst
the,

24 Lcvc there thync offrynge before
the altre, and go thy waye first and
reconcile thy silfe to thy brotlier, and
then come and offre thy gyHtc.

(' 2

20

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-S.VXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

25 Siyais

wailaliii^TJ^iids

andastaiiVn
Jjcinaniina spiauto, uud |nitei is 111 wiga
mij> i'mma, ibai wlian atgibai ))uk sa anda-
staiia stauui, yah sa staua |iik atgibai
andbahta, } ah in karkara gaUigyaza.

26 Amen qijna jms, Ni usgaggis yain-

])YOy unte usgibis j^ana minuistan kintu.

27 Hausidedu]) jjatei qij^anist, Ni hor-

inos.

25 Beo clii onbugende dinum wider-
winnan In-ade, da hwile de dii. eart on
wege mid him, de-laes de din ^vidcr-
winna de sylle dam deman, and se dema
de sylle dam j^ene, and dii sy on cwerteru
send.

26 Sojjes ic secge de, Ne gsest

dii
danone, aer dii agylde done ytemestan
feor|)lingc.

27 Ge gehyrdon da?t on ealdum cwyd-
um gecwedeu wies, Ne unriht-hLeme dii.

28 A})]jan ik qi|)a Yzwis, Jjatei whazuh
saci saiwlii}) qinon du luston izos, yu ga-
horinoda izai in hairtiu sciuamma.

28 86})liee ic secge eow, diet ailc da?ra
de wif gesyh}) and hyre gewiliia}), eallunga
dset se gesyugaj) on hys heortan.

29 1\> yabai aiigo jjcin

j)ata taihswo
marzyai |)uk, usstigg^ ita, yah wairp af
))us ; batizo ist auk |jus, ei fraqistnai ains
li))iwe |)einaize, yah ni allata leik jjein
gadriusai "in gaiainnan.

30 Yah yabai taihswo Jjeina hand us
marzyai jjuk, afmait }>o, yah wairp af
J)us : batizo 1st auk \)us,
ei fraqistnai
jicinaize, yah ni alhita leik
ains li))iwe
J)ein gadriusai in gaiainnan.

31 Qijianuh |)an ist, patei whazuh saei

afletai qen, gibai izai afstassais bokos.

32 1\> ik qi|)a izwis, Jnatei whazuh saei
afleti)> qen seina, inuh fairina kalkinass-
aus, tauyi}) ))0 horinou, yah sa ize afsat-
ida liugaij), hurino}).

33 Aftra hausidedu]>, )\atei

qi|>an I'st
J)aim airizam, Ni ufarswarais, 'i]> usgibais
Frauyin ai])ans Jjeinans.

29 Gyf din s^vydre cage dc seswicie,
ahola hit lit, and awurp hyt fram de ;
s6))lice de ys betere, dset an dinra lima
forwurde, donne eal din lichama si on
helle asend.

30 And gyf din swidre hand de as\Nnce,
aceorf hi of, and a^vurp hi fram de ;
witodlice de ys betere, da?t an dinra
lima forwurde, donne eal din lichama
fare to helle."''

31 Sojilice hit ys gecwcden, Swa hwylc
swa his wif forlaet, he sylle hyre hyra
hiw-gedales boc.

32 Ic secge eow to sojnim, da^t ale de
his wif forhet, biiton forlegenysse |nngum,
he de|) da?t heo unriht-hsemfi, and se un-
riht-hsem]', de forlseteue a?fter him ge-
nimj>.

33 Eft ge gehyrdon, dtet gecwcden wa?s
on calihim cwydum, Ne forswcre dii, soj)-
lice Drihtne dii agyltst dine aj)as.

34 A}i|ian ik qi|)a izwis, ni swaran allis ;

ni l)i liiniina, unte stols 1st Cuj)S ;

35 Nih bi air|>ai, unte fotul)aurd 'ist
fotiwc is; nih l)i lairusaulwmai, unte
baurgs ist )'is luikilins J)iu(huiis ;

36 Nih bi liaubida jx-inamnia swaiais,
\intc ni magt ain tagl wheit, ai)>)'au swart
gatauyan ;

37 Siyai|>-])an waurd i'zwar, Ya, ya ;
i"|> pata managizo j)aiin, us ])aTn-

Ne, ne ;
ma ubiliu ist.

34 Ic secge eow s6|>lice, dj\?t ge eallunga
ne swerion ; ne jnirh heofon, fordam de
heoys Godes j^rym-sctl ;
35 Ne |)urh eor|>au, fordam de heo ys
hys fot-scamul ; ne }'urh Hicrusalcm,
fordam de heo ys nuvrcs cyniiuges
cester ;

;]6 Ne dii ne swore |nirh din hcafod,
fordam de dii ne milit aMinc loce tredon
hwitne, odde blacnc ;

37 8o|'Hee si eowei- spra^c, Hyt ys, hyt
ys ; Hyt nys, hyt nys ; sol^licc gyf d^er
mare by|», (Xxt bi|) of yfele.

^

1

;

V. 25-37-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

21

25 Be thou consentynge to thin ad-
uersarie soon, the whijle thou art in the
way with hym, lest perauenture thin ad-
uersarie take thee to the domesman, and
the domesman take thee to the mynystre,
and thou be sente in to prisoun,

26 Trewely I say to thee, Thou shalt
not go thennes, til thou 5elde the last
ferthing.

27 3e han herd for it was said to olde

men, Thou shalt nat do lecherye.

28 Forsothe Y say to 50U, for why
euery man that seeth a womman for to
coueite hire, now he hath do lecherie by
hire in his herte.

29 That 5if thi ri5t ei^e sclaundre thee,
pulle it out, and cast it fro thee ; for it
s^)eedith to thee, that oon of thi membris
perishe, than al thi body go in to helle.

30 And 5if thi ri^t hond sclaundre thee,
kitt it awey, and cast it fro thee ; for it
spedith to thee, that oon of thi membris
perishe, than that al thi body go in to
helle.
31 Forsothe it is said. Who euere shal
leeue his wyf, 5eue he to hir a libel.

32 Sothely Y say to 50U, that euery
man that shal leeue his wyf, outaken
cause of fomicacioun, he makith hire do
lecherie, and he that weddith the forsaken
w'ljfy doth auoutrie.
33 Efte soonys 366 han herd, that it was
said to olde men, Thou shalt not for-
swere, sothely to the Lord thou shalt
jeeld thin oethis.
34 Forsothe Y say to 50U, to nat swere
on al mancre ; neither by heuene, for it
is the trone of God ;

35 Nether by the erthe, for it is the
stoic of his feet ; neither by Jerusalem,
for it is the citcc of a greet kyng ;

25 Agre with thine adversary at once,
whyles thou arte in the waye with hym,
lest thine adversary delyvre the to the
iudge, and the iudge delivre the to the
minister, and then thou be cast in to
preson.

26 I say unto the verely, Thou shalt not
come out thence, till thou have payed the
vtmost farthinofe,

27 Ye have herde howe yt was sayde to
them off olde tyme, Thou shalt nott com-
mitt advoutrie.

28 But I say vnto you, that whosoever
eyeth a wyfe lustynge affter her, hathe
committed advoutrie with her alredy in
his hert.

29 Wherfore yf thy right eye offende
the, plucke hym out, and caste him from
the ; better hit is for the, that one of thy
membres perisshe, then that thy whole
body shuld be caste in to hell.

30 Also yf thy right honde offend the,
cut hym off, and caste hym from the ;
better hyt ys, that one off thy membres
perisshe, then that all thy body shulde be
caste in to hell.

3

Hit ys sayd, Whosoever put awaye
his ^^fe, let hym geve her a testymonyall
of her devorcement.

3 2 But I say vnto you,' whosoever put
awaye hys wyfe, except hyt be for fornica-
tion, causeth her to breake matrimony,
and whosoever maryeth her that is di-
vorsed, breketh wedlocke.

33 Agayne ye have herde, howe it was
sayd to them off' olde tyme, Thou shalt
not forswere thy silfe, but shaltt performc
thyne othe to God.

34 But I say vnto you, swere not at all

nether by heven, for hit
scate

ys Goddcs

35 Nor yet by the erth, ffbr it ys hys
fote stole ; nether by Jerusalem, llbr hit
ys the cite of the grcte kynge ;

36 Neither thou shalt swere by thin
Leucd, for thou muist not make oon
hecr wliyt, or blak ;

37 But be ;oure word 3ca, ^ca ; Nay,
forsot'ic that that is more than

nay ;
this, is of yuel.

36 Nether shalt thou swearc by tliy
liccd, because thou canst not make one
hecr whyte, or blacke ;

37 But your comninnicacion shalbe Ye,
ye ; Nay, nay ; for what soever is more
than that, comcth off yvcll.

;

;

22

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

38 Hausidedu)? ))atei qijjan ist, Augo

38 Ge gehyrdon^ daet gecweden waes,

uiid augin, yah tun})U uiid tun}>au.

39 i|) "ik qi|)a izwis, ni andstandan allis
Jjanima unselyin ; ak yabai wluis Jjuk
etautai bi taihswoQ |)ema kiuuu, waudei
imma yah \>o anj)ara ;

40 Yah jjanima wilyandin mi)? |)us staua,
yah paida J)ciiia 11 i man, aflet imma yah
wastya

41 Yah yabai whas jjiik ananau|)yai

rasta aiiia, gaggais mij? imma twos.

Eage for eage, and t6\> for ic\>.

39 S6))lice ic seege cow, ne winne ge
ongcn da de eow yfel do)) ; ac gyi hwa
de slea on din swydrc wengc, gegearwa
him dsst oder ;

40 And dam de wylle on dome wid de
flitan, and niman dine tunecan, liet him
to dinne waefels ;

41 And swa hwa swa de genyt ))usend

stapa, ga mid him odre twa ))usend.

42 pamma bidyandin jjuk gibais, yah
))amma wilyandin af ))us Iciwhan sis ni
uswandyuis.

42 Syle dam de de bidde, and dam de
[wylle] ^ xt de borgian ne wyrn du
him,^

43 Hausideduj) patei qi|>an ist, Friyos
newliundyan jjeinana, yah fiais fiand ]?ein-

43 Gre gehyrdon daet gecweden wses,
Lufa dinne nextan, and hata dinne feond.

aua.'''

44 A})J)an "ik qi|)a Tzwis, friyo}) fiyands
"izwarans, )'iu|)yai[) })ans wrikandans izwis,
waihi tauyaij) |)aim hatyandam izwis, yah
bidyai}) bi j^ans usj^riutandans 'izwis ;

44 S6))lice ic secge eow, lufia)> eo\vre
fynd, and d6)j wel dam de cow yfel d6)>,
and gcbidda)) for eo>vi'e ehteras, and tael-
endum eow

45 Ei wair})ai)) sunyus attins izwaris j^is
in liiminam, unte sunnon scina uiTannei[)
ana ubilans yah godans, yah rigneij? ana
garaihtans yah ana inwindans.

45 Doet ge sin eowres fseder beam de
on heofonum ys,
his
sunne up-aspring)) ofer da godan and
ofer da yfelan, and he Icct rinan ofer da
rihtwisan and ofer da unrihtwisan.

se de de))

da^t

46 Yabai auk friyo))

))ans friyondans
i'zwls ainans, who mizdono habai)) 1 niu
yah ))ai ))iudo ))ata samo tauyand ?
47 Yah yabai golci)) ))ans friyonds izwar-
ans )nitainci, whe managizo tauyi)> ? niu
yah motaryos ))ata samo tauyand,

46 Gyf ge s6)>lice da lufia)) de eow luf-
ia)), hwylce mede habbaj) ge 1 hii ne do))
manful Ic swa ]
47 And gyf ge daet an d6\> d.Tt ge conntc
gebrodra wylcumia)), liwatjt do ge mare?
hii ne do)) ha:deue swa ?

48 Siyai)) nu yns fulhitoyai, swaswe
atta izwar sa in himinam fulhitoyis ist.

48 Eornustlice beo)) fulfrcmede, swii

eower heofoulica fa3der is fullfremcd.

Chap. VI. i Atsaiwlii)>, armaion iz-
wara ni tauyan in andwair))ya man no, du
saiwlum im, ai|)))au hmn ni lial)ai)) fram
attin izwaramma j^amma in himinam.

2 pan nu tauyais armaion, ni haurnyais
faura ))us, swaswe ]>&[ liutans tauyand in
ga(|um)Mm yah in garunsim, ci hauhyain-
dau iVani mannam ; amen qijni izwis,
audncnmn mizdon seina.

Chap. VI.

i Begyma)>, da^t ge ne
don eowre rihtwisnesse befdran mannum,
diet ge sin geherede fram him, elles
na^bbe ge mede mid eowrum fajder de
on hcofoiuim ys.

2 Kornustlice donne du dine a?!lmcssan
sylle, ne blawe man byman beforan de,
swii liceteras do)) on gesonnunigum and
on wicum, da't hi sin ge-Jirwur)iodc fram
mannum ; so)? ic secge eow, hi onfengou
hyra mede.

;

V. 38.-VL 2.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

23

38 3ee ban herde that it is said, Ei^e

for ei'^e, toth for toth.
39 But Y say to 50U, to nat a^ein stonde
yuel j but 5if any shal smyte thee in the
ri3t cheeke, 3eue to hym and the tother ;

40 And to hym that wole stryue with
thee in dome, and take awey thi coote,
leeue thou to hym and thin ouer clothe ;
41 And who euere eonstrayneth thee a
thousand pacis, go thou with hym other
tweyne.

42 Forsothe ^if to hym that axith of
thee, and turne thou nat awey fro hym
that wol borwe of thee.

43 3ee ban herd that it is said, Thou
sbalt loue thin nei3bore, and bate thin
enmy.
44 But Y say to 50U, loue ^ee 5oure
enmyes, do 5ee wel to hem that haten
50U, and preye 5ee for men pursuynge,
and falsly cbalengynge 30U ;

45 That 3ee be the sonys of ^oure fadir
that is in heuenes, that makith bis sune
to springe vp vpon good and yuel men,
and rayneth vpon iuste men and vniuste
men.

46 For ^if 36 louen hem that louen 30U,
what meed shul 3ee baue ? whether and
puplicans don nat this thing 1
47 And 3if 3ee greten^ 3oure bretheren
oonly, what more ouer shul 3ee don 1
whether and paynymmys don nat this
thing ?

38 Ye have herde howe it ys sayd, An

eye for an eye, a tothe for a tothe.

39 But I saye vnto you, that ye witb-
stond not wronge ; but yf a man geve
the a blowe on thy right cheke, tourne
to him the othre ;

40 And yff eny man will sue the at the
lawe, and take thy coote from the, lett
hym have thy cloocke also ;

41 And whosoever wyll compell the to

goo a myle, goo wyth him twayne.

42 Geve to him that axeth, and from
him that wolde borowe tourne not awaye.

43 Ye have herde howe it is sayde. Thou
sbalt love thyne neghbour, and hate thine
enemy.
44 But Y saye vnto you, love youre
enemies, blesse them that coursse you,
do good to them that hate you, praye
flfor them which doo you wronge, and
persecute you

45 That ye maye be the chyldren of
youre hevenly father, ffor be maketh his
sunne to aryse on the yvell and on the
good, and sendeth his reyne on the iuste
and on the iniuste.

46 For yf ye shall love them which love
you, what rewarde shall ye have ? doo
not the publicans even so ?
47 And if ye be frendly to youre bre-
thren onli, what singuler thynge doo ye 1
doo nott the publicans lykewyse ?

48 Tbei-fore be 3ee parfit, as and 30ure

48 Ye shall tberfore be perfecte, even

heueuly fadir is parfit.

as youre hevenly father is perfecte.

Chap. VT. t Take 366 bede, lest 36
don 30ur ri3twisncHse ])efore men, that
3ee be seen of hem, ellis 36 sluile nat ban
meed at 30ure fadir that is in lieuencs.

2 Tberfore when thou dost almesse, nylc
thou synge byforc thee in a trumpc, as
ypocriti.s don in synagogis and strcctis,
that tlici ben maad worHliipful of men ;
forsothe Y saye to 30U, thei ban resceyucd
her mecde.

Chap. VT.

i Take hcde to youre
almcs, that ye geve it not in the syght of
men to the intent that ye wolde be scne
off them, or els ye gett no rewarde off
youre father in hevcn.

2 Whensoever tberfore thou gevest thine
almes, thou sbalt not make a trom])et to
be blowne before the, as the yj)ocn*tcs
do in tlie synagoges and in the stretcs,
ffbr to be preysed off' men ; verily I say
vnto you, they have there rewarde.

5
1

24

;

5
7

;

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

3 ij) ])uk tauyandan armaion, ni witi
lileidumci j^eiuawha tauyij) taihswo jjeiua,

3 S6}^lice donne dii dine aelmessan do,

nyte din wynstre hwaet do din swydre,

4 Ei siyai so armahairti|)a jjeina in fulli-
in

snya, yah atta })eins
fulhsnya, usf(il)i|) |)us in l»airlitein.

saei saiwlii}>

5 Yah jjan hidyai}), ni siyai |> swaswe j>ai
liutans, unte friyond in gaqumjjim yah
waihstam plapyo standandans bidyan, ei
gaumyaindau mannam ; amen qi})aizwis,
Jjatei habaud mizdon seina.

6 I|> J)U ];an bidyais, gagg in he)?yon
})eina, yah galukands haurdai
)?einai,
bidei du attin jjeinamma [janima in fulh-
snya, yah atta
saei saiwhij? in
fulhsnya, usgibij) |>us in bairhtein.

jjcins

7 Bidyandansu|)-|>an ni filuwaurdyai}?,
swaswe |)ai jjiudo, })Ugkei}> im auk ei in
filuwaurdcin scinai andhausyaindau.

8 Ni galeikoj) nu \>a\m, wait auk atta
izwar jjizci yus ]?auibu|), faurjjizci yus
bidyaij> ina.

9 Swa nu bidyaij) yus, Atta unsar \>u in

hiniinam, weihnai namo \>em ;

10 Qimai jjiudinassus ]?eins ;

wair]>ai
wilya jieins swe in himina yah ana airjiai

4 Dset din aelmesse sy on diglum, and
din faeder hit agylt de, se de gesyh}> on
diglum.

5 And donne ge eow gebiddon, ne beo ge
swylce lieeteras, da lutiaj? daet big gebid-
don hi standende on gesomnungum and
strseta liyrnum, da^t men hig geseon ; s6|>
ic secge eow, hi onfengon hyra mede.

6 Du s6)?lice donne dii de gebidde, gang
into dinum bed-clyfan,and dinre dura bc-
locenre, bide dinne feeder on dihlum, and
din fteder de gesyh)> on dihlum, hyt
agylt de.

7 S6};lice donne ge eow gebiddon nell-
on^ ge sprecan fela, swa swa hacdene,
hig wena}; daet hi sin gehyrede on hyra
menigfealdan sprsece.

8 Nellen ge eornostlice him ge-efenlsec-
an, s6[)lice eower fieder wat hwat eow
|>earf ys, serdam de ge hyne bidda)).

9 Eornustlice gebidda[> eow dus, Fseder
ure du de eart on hcofonum, si din nama
gehalgod ;

I o To-becume din rice ; gewiu'de din

willa on eorj)an swa swa on heofonum ;

1

Hlaif unsarana jjana sinteinan gif uns

II U'rne daeghwamlican hlaf syle us

him ma daga ;

T 2 Yah aflet uns j^atei skulans siyaima,
swaswe yah weis afletani |?aim skulam
unsaraim ;

13 Yah ni l^riggais uns in fraistubnyai,
ak lausei uns at )>amnia ubilin ; unte
1st ))iudangardi, yah mahts, yah
]>cina
wul|)us in aiwiiis, Amen.
14 Unteyabai alletij) mannam missaded-
ins ize, afleti}> yah izwis atta izwar sa
ufar himinam.

1

l|)yabai ni aflctij) mamiam missaded-
ins ize, ni jjau atta izwar allctijj missa-
dcdins Vzwaros.

16 Aj)|ian bi{)C fastaij', ni wair)>aij' swa-
swe |)ai liutans gaurai, frawardyand auk
andwairjna seina, eigasaiwhaindau mann-
am fastandans ; amen (jij)a izwis, j)atci
andnemun mizdon seina,

to-daeg

12 And forgyf us ure gyltas, swa swa
we forgyfaj) drum gylteudum ;

13 And ne gclacd du us on costnunge

ac alys us of yfele

.

.

.

.

S6|)Hce.

14 Witodlice gyf ge forgyfa}> raannum
hyra synna, donne forgyf[) eower se heof-
enlica fjvder eow eowre gyltas.

1

Gyf ge soj'lice ne forgyfa|' mannum,
ne eower feeder ne forgyf)) eow cowre
synna. ^

16 S6}>lice donne ge fopston, nellon ge
wesan sw}'lce lease-lieceteras, hig fornym-
seteowun
mannum ftestende ; s6|dice ic secge cow,
djet hig onfengon liyra mede.

hyra ansyna, da^t hig

a)»

17 1)>

j)U fastands, salbo haubij) j'cin,

1

Dii 86|)lice donne dii faeste, smyra

yah ludya |)eiiia |>wah,

din hcafod, and |nvcah dine ansyne.

6
2

;

;

6
2

;

VL3-I7-]

WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1^26.

25

3 But thee doynge almesse, knowe nat

the left hond what thi ri3t hond doth,

4 That thi almes be in hidlis, and thi
fadir that seeth in hidlis, shal 5elde to
thee.

5 And when ^e shuln preye, 5ee shuln
nat be as ypocritis, the whiche stondynge
louen to pi'e^e in synagogis and corners
of streetis, that thei be seen of men ;
trewly Y say to 50U, thei han resseyued
her meede.

6 But whan thou shalt preye, entre in
to thi couche, and the dore schet, preye
thi fadir in hidlis, and thi fadir that seeth
in hidlis, shal 5eelde to thee.

7 Sothely preyinge nyle

speke
moche, as hethen men don, for thei gessen
that thei ben herd in theire moche speche.

5ee

8 Therfore nyl 5e be maad liche to hem,
for 3oure fadir woot what is need to 50U,
before that ^e axen hym.

9 Forsothe thus 50 shulen preyen, Oure
fadir that art in heuenes, halwid be thi
name

I o Thi kyngdom cumme to ; be thi

wille don as in heuen and in erthe

3 But when thou doest thine almes, let
not thy lyfte hond knowe what thy
righte hand doth,

4 That thyne almes may be secret, and
thy father which seith in secret, shall
rewarde the openly.

5 And when thou prayest, thou shalt
nott be as the ypocrites are, for they love
to stond and praye in the synagogges
and in corners of the stretes, because
they wolde be sene of men ; vereley I saye
vnto you, they have there rewarde.

6 But when thou prayest, entre into thy
chamber, and shutt thy dore to the, and
praye to thy father which ys in secrete,
and thy father which seith in secret, shal
rewarde the openly.

7 But when ye praye bable not moche,
as the gentyls do, for they thincke that
they shalbe herde ffor there moche bab-
lynges sake.

8 Be ye not lyke them there fore, for
youre father knoweth wherof ye have
neade, before ye axe off him.

9 After thys maner there fore praye ye,
oure father which arte in heven, halow-

ed be thy name ;

I o Let thy kingdom come ; thy wyll
be fulfilled as well in erth as hit ys in
heven

I I 3if to vs this day oure breed ouer

I I Geve vs this daye oure dayly breade j

other substaunce ;

1

And for3eue to vs oure dettis, as we

forjeue to oure dettours ;

1

And forgeve vs oure treaspases, even

as we forgeve them which treaspas vs j

13 And leede vs nat in to temptacioun,

but delyuere vs fro yuel.

Ameu.^

13 Leede vs not into temptacion, but

delyvre vs ffrom yvell.

Amen.

14 Forsothe 5if 5ee shulen for^eue to
men her synnys, and 3oure heuenly fadir
shal for^cuc to 30U ^oure trcspassis.

15 Sothely 3if 3ec sliulcn for3euc not to
men, neither 3ourc fadir shal for3eue to
30U 3ourc synnes.

1

But when 3ee fasten, nyl 30 be maad
as ypocritis sorweful,for thei putten her
facis out of kyndly tcnnys, tliut thei
seme fastynge to men ; trewly Y say to
50U, thei han resseyued Iicr meede.

r7 But whan thou fastist, anoyntc thin

hedc, and washe thi face,

14 For and yff ye shall forgeve other
men there treaspases, youre father in
heven shal also forgeve you.

15 But and ye wyll not forgeve men
there trespases, no more shall youre
fatlier forgeve youre treaspases.

1

Moreovre when ye fa^te, be not sad
as the yprocritcs arc, for they disfigure
tlicre faces, that hit myght aj)crc vnto
men that they fastc ; verely Y say vnto
you, they liave there rewarde.

17 lint thou when thou fastest, ann-

oynte thyne heed, and washe tliy face,

1

26

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

;

18 Ei ni gasaiwhaizau mannam fastands,
ak attin |)einamina |)amma in fulhsnya,
yah atta |>ein3 saei saiwbi)) "in fulhsnya,
usgibi}) jnis.

19 Ni huzdyai)) iz\vis huzda ana air|>ai,
Jjarei malo yah nidwa frawar(l{'i|>, yah
Jjarei })iubos ufgra])and yah hlifand ;

20 i|> huzdyaij) I'zwis huzda in liimina,
}>arci nih malo nih nidwa frawardci[), yah
jjarei |)iub()S ni ufgraband, nih stiland.

18 Dset du ne sy gesewen fram mann-
um ficstende, ac dinum faeder de ys on
dyglum, and din finder de gesyhj) on
dygluni, hyt agylt de.

19 Nellen ge gold-hordian eow gold-
hordas on eorJ)an, divr 6m and m()|)|)e hit
fornimj), and daer )jcofas hit dclfaj) and
forstela)) ;

20 Gold-hordia}> eow s6|)lice gold-hordas
on heofcnan, da^r nador 6m ne mo|)|)e
hit ne fornimj), and dar jjcofas hit ne
del fa |), ne ne forstelaj).

2

parci auk ist liuzd izwar, ]?ainih 'ist

2 1 Witodlice djer din gold-hord is,

yah hairto izwar.

da?r is din heorte.

22 Lukarn leikis ist augo ; yabai nu
augo ]>e'm ainfalj) ist, allata leik jjein liuh-
adein wair|)i|) ;

23 i|) yabai augo ]>em unsel ist, allata
Yabai nu
leik |>ein riqizein wair]?i|).
liuhaj) jjata in )?us riqiz ist, Jjata riqiz
whan filu ?

24 Ni manna mag twaim frauyam
skalkinon, unte yabai fiyai]) ainana, yah
an|)arana friyo]) ; aijjjjau ainamma ufhaus-
Ni magu])

'i\> an|>ararama frakann.

e\\>,
GuJ)a skalkinon yah mammonin.'*'

25 Du|)|?e qi]?a izwis, ni maurnaij) saiw-
izwarai, wha matyai)> yah wha
alai
drigkai}) ; nih leika izwaramma, whe
Niu saiwala mais ist fodeinai,
wasyaij).
yah leik wastyom 1

26 Tnsaiwhij) du fuglam himinis, ]>c[ ni
saiand, nih snci|)and, nih lisand in banst-
ins ; yah atta izwar sa ufar himinani
Niu yus mais Aml|)rizans
fodei})

ins.

8iyu|) })aim ?

27 ij) whas izwara maurnands mag
aleina

anaaukan ana wahstu seinaua
aina ]

28 Yah bi wastyos wha saurgai[)? Oa-
kunnai[> blomans hai)>yos, whaiwa wahs-
Nih arbaidyand, nih spinnand ;
yaiid.

22 Dines liehaman leohtfiet is din
cage ; gyf din eage bij> anfeald, call din
lichama bij? beorht

23 Gif din eage s6|>lice bi}) manfull,
Eorn-
eall din lichama byj) |)ysterfull.
ustlice gyf da^t leoht de on de is synt
J)ystru, Ini mycle beoj) da |)ystru ?^

24 Ne mseg nan man twam hhiforduni
|)eowian, odde he s6))lice senne hataj),
and 6derne lufaj) ; odde he bij) auum
gehyrsum, and 6drum ungehyrsum. Ne
magon ge Gode ])eowian and woruld-
welan.

25 Fordam ic secge eow, daet ge ne
sin ymbhydige eowre sawle, hwnet ge
eton ; ne eowrum liehaman, mid hwani
Hii nys seo sawl
ge syn ymbscrydde.
selre donne mete, and eower lichama
betera donne dset reaf 1

26 Bchealdaj) heofonan fucflas, fordam
de big nc sawaj), ne big no rij)a|>, ne big
ne gadriaj) on berne ; and cower hcof-
Hii ne spit ge
onlica fnedcr hig fet.
selran donne hig 1

27 Hwylc eower ma^g 86})lice gej>encan
dt-vt he ge-eaenige ane elne to hys an-
licnesse ?

28 And to hwi sj-nt ge ymbhydige be
reafe ?
hii
In'g wcaxaj). Ne swinca)) hig, ne hig ne
spinnaj) ;

Besceawia)) flec>Tes

lilian,

29 Qi|mh |mn izwis, jjatei nih Saulaumon
in allamnia wul|iau seinamma gawasida
sik swo aiiis |'ize.

30 Yah |)an(le |mta hawi hai}>yo8, himma
daga wisaudo, yah gistradagis in auhu

2Q le secge eow 86})lice, dnet furdon
Salomon on eallum liys wuldre na^s
ofcrwrigen swa swji an of dyson.

30 S()|)lice gyf .Tcyres wcod, da?t do
to-dfeg is, and h\\> to-morgen on ofcu

1

;

;

1

;

VI. i8-3o.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

27

18 That thou be nat seen fastynge to
men, but to thi fadir that is in hidlis, and
thi fadir that seeth in hidlis, shal ^eelde
to thee.

19 Nyle 3e tresoure to 50U tresours in
erthe, wher rust and mou^the distruy-
eth, and wher theeues deluen out and
stelen

20 But tresoure ^ee to 50U tresouris in
heuene, wher neither rust ne mou3the
distruyeth, and wher theues deluen nat
out,''" ne stelen.

18 That it appere nott vnto men howe
that thou fastest, but vnto thy father
which is in secrete, and thy father which
seith in secret, shall rewarde the openly.
19 Gaddre not treasure together on
erth, where rust and mothes corrupte,
and where theves breake through and
steale ;

20 But gaddre ye treasure togedder in
heven, where nether rust nor mothes
corrupte, and wher theves nether breake
vp, nor yet steale.

2

Forsothe wher thi tresour is, there

2

For whearesoever youre treasure ys,

and thin herte is.

22 The lanterne of thi body is thin e5e ;
^if thin ei^e be symple, al thi body shal
be li5tful

23 Bot ^if thyo. ei^e be weyward, al thi
body shal be derkful.
Therfore 5if the
li3t that is in thee be derknessis, how
grete shulen thilk derknessis be 1

24 No man may seme to two lordis, for-
sothe ethir he shal haat the toon, and
loue the tother ; other he shal susteyn the
^e mown
toon, and dispise the tothir.
nat serue to God and richessis.

25 Therfore Y say to 50U, that 56 ben
nat besie to ^oure lijf, what ^e shulen
ete ; othir to 50ure body, with what 5e
Wher ^oure lijf is nat
Bhuln be clotliid.
more than mete, and the body more than
clothe 1

26 Beholde 50 the flee^inge foulis of
the eir, for thei sowen nat, ne repyn,
neitlier gadren in to bernys ; and 3oure
fadir of heuen fedith hem. Wher ^e ben
nat more worthi than thei 1

27 Sothely who of 30U thenkinge may

putte to to his stature 00 cubite 1

28 And of
Beholde 30
thei wexen.
spynncn ;

29 'JVewly
Sal am on in
oon of thcs.
30 For ^if
of the fecld,

clothing what ben 3c besye 1
the lilies of the feelde, how
Thei traueilen nat, netiier

I say to 30U, for whi neither
al his glorie was keuerid as

God clothith thus the heye
that to day is, and to morwc

there are youre liertes also.

22 The light off thy body is thyne eye ;
wherfore if thyne eye be single, all thy
body ys full of light

23 But and if thyne eye be wycked,
then is all thy body full of dercknes.
Wherefore yf the light that is in the be
dercknes, howe greate ys that dercknes ?
24 No man can serve two masters, for
other he shall hate the one, and love the
other ; or els he shall lene the one, and
Ye can nott serve
despise the other.
God and mammon.

25 Therefore I saye vnto you, be not
carefull for youre lyfe, what ye shall eate,
or what ye shall dryncke ; nor yet for
youre boddy, what rayment ye shall weare.
Ys not the lyfe more worth then meate,
and the boddy more off value then ray-
ment 1

26 Beholde the foules of the aier, for
they sowe not, neder reepc, nor yet cary
into the barnes ; and yett youre hevcnly
Are ye not better
father fedeth them.
then they ?

27 Whiche off you though he toke
tought therefore coulde put one cubit
vnto his stature 1

28 And why care ye then for rayment 1
off the felde, howe
They labour not, nether

Beholde the lylcs
thy growe.
spynn ;

29 And yet for all that I sale vnto you,
that even Solomon in all his royalte was
nott iiniycd lykc vnto one of these.

30 WlicHoro yf God so clotlie the
grassc, which ys to duye in the felde, and

1

28

1

;

;

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

galagi|>, Guj) swa wasyi}), whaiwa mais
izwis leitil galaubyandaiis 1

asend, God scryt, eala ge gehwaedes
geleafan, dam mycle ma he sciyt.eow 1

3

Ni mauriiai}) nil, qi})aiulans, Wlia
matyani 1 ai|)|)au, Wha drigkam ] aiJ>J)au,
Whe wasyaima 1

32 All auk })ata jnudos sokyand ; waituh
jjatci

J)an atta izwar sa ufar hiiiiiuain
J>aurbu})

3

Nellen ge eornustlice beon ymbliyd-
jge, dus cwedeude, Hwa*t ete we? odde,
Hwait drince we ? odde, Mid hwam beo
we oferwrogene 1

32 S6|?lice ealle das Jjing )>eoda seceaj)

witodlice eower faeder wat da3t ge ealra
dyssa J>inga be))Ui-fon.

33 Eornustlice

serest Godes
rice and hys rihtwisnessc, and ealle das
J?ing cow beoj) doer- to gc-eacnodc,

8ecea]>

34 Ne beo ge na hogicnde ymb da
morgenlican neodc, s6|)lice se morgenlica
dseg cara]) ymb hyne sylfne; segbwylc
dseg ba3f}) genoh on hys agenum ymb-
hogan.

^Chap VII. I Nellen ge deman, daet

ge ne syn fordemede ;

2 Witodlice dam ylcan dome de ge
demaj), eow h\\> gedemcd, and on dam
ylcan gemete de ge metaj), eow byj>
gemctcn.

3 To hwi gesihst dii d»t mot on dines
brodor egan, and du ne gesyhst done
beam on dinum aujenum eairan 1

4 Odde humeta cwyst dii to dinum
breder, Brodur, J>afa da't ic ut-ado diet
mot of dinum eagan, donnc se beam
bi)j on dinum agenum eagan ?

5 La dii liccetere, ado aerest iit done
beam of dinum agenum eagan, and be-
biiwa donne dret dii lit-iido da?t mot of
dines brodur eagan.

6 Nellen ge syllan diet halige Inindum,
ne ge ne wurpcn eo>\Te mcrc-grotu to-
foran eownim s^vynon, dc-bTS big mid
hyra fotum big fortrcdon, and big donne
ongoan gcwcnde eow toslyton.^

7 liidda}), and eowbi|> gescald ; secea]>,
and ge hit findaji ; cuucia)), and cow h\\>
ontyncd.

8 Witodlice jclc dapra de bit, he onfcb}>
and se de sec}), he h}i, fint ; and dam
cnucicndum bij? ontjued.

;

VI. 3 1. —VII. 8.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

29

is sente in to the fourneyse, how moche
more 30U of litil feith 1

31 Therfore nyl 36 be bisie, sayinge,
What shulen ^ve ete 1 or, What shulen
we drynke 1 or, With what thing shulen
we be keuered ?

32 Forsothe heithen men sechen alle
these thingis j trewly ^oure fadir wote
that 5e han need to alle these thingis.

33 Therfore seke 5ee first the kyngdam
of God and his ri^twisnesse, and alle
these thingis shulen be cast to 30U.

34 Therfore nyle 5e be besie in to the
morwe, for the morew day shal be besie
to it self; sothely it suflScith to the day
his malice.

to morowe shalbe cast into the fournace,
shall he not moche more do the same
vnto you, o ye off lytle fayth ?

31 Therfore take no thought, saynge,
What shall we eate 1 or. What shall we
or, Wherewith shall we be
dryncke 1
clothed ?

32 Aftre all these thynges seke the
gentyls ; for youre hevenly father know-
eth that ye have neade off all these
thynges.

33 But rather seke ye fyrst the kyng-
dom off heven and the rightewesnes ther
of, and all these thynges shalbe ministred
vnto. you.

34 Care not therfore for the daye folo-
ynge, for the daye foloynge shall care ffor
yt sylfe ; eche dayes trouble ys sufficient
for the same silfe day.

Chap. VII. i Nyle ^e deme, that 56

be nat demyd ;

Chap. VII. i ludge not, lest ye be

iudged

2 For in what dome 5e demcn, ^e shulen
ben demyd, and in what mesure ^e
meten, it shal be meten to 50U.

2 For as ye iudge, so shall ye be iudged,
and with what mesur ye mete, with the
same shall it be mesurd to you agayne.

3 But what seest thou a festu"*" in the
ei3e of thi brother, and thou seest nat a
beme in thin owne ei3e ?

4 Or what raaner saist thou to thi
brother, Brother, suffre that I caste out
a festu fro thin ei3e, and loo ! a beme is
in thin owne ei3e 1

5 Ypocrite, cast out first a beme of thin
ei3C, and than thou slialt see for to cast
out a festu of the ei5e of thi brother.

6 Nyl 3e 3CUC holy thing to houndis,
netlier sende 30 3our margaritis^ Ijcforc
swyne, lest perauenture thei defouien
hem with tlicire feet, and lest Jioundis
turned to gidrc al to-ljreke 30U.

7 Axe 3e, and it shal be 3ouen to 30U ;
Bcke 30, and 3c sliulen fyndo ; knocke 3e,
and it shal be opnyd to 30U.

8 For echo that axith, takith ; jind lie
sluil be

that scchitli, fyndith ; and it
opnydc to a man knokynge.

3 Why seist thou a moote in thy brothers
eye, and percevest not the beame that ys
in thyne awne eye %

4 Or why sayest thou to thy brother,
Suffre me to plucke oute a moote oute
off' thyne eye, and behold ! a beame is in
thyne awne eye %

5 Ypocryte, first cast oute the beame
oute of thyne awne eye, and then shalte
thou se clearly to plucke oute the moote
oute off" thy brothers eye.

6 Geve not that which is holy to doggcs,
before
nether cast ye youre pcarles
swyne, lest they treade them vnder their
fete, and the other tourue agayne and all
to rent you.

7 Axe, and it shalbe gevcn you ; seke,
and ye sliull fynd; knocke, and it shalbe
o})en('(l vnto you.

8 For whosoever axeth, reccavcth ; and
he tliat scketh, fyndeth ; and to hym
tliat knocketh it slialbe opened.

30

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

5
9
3
7
1

;

;

9 Hwylc man is of cow, gyf his sunu

hyne bit hlafes, sylst dii him stan 1

10 Odde gyf he bytt fisces, sylst dii

him na'ddran 1

1

Eornustlice mi ge, cle

}'fcle sjTit,
cunnun gode sylena eowrum bearnuni
syllan, mycle ma cower fa?der c!e on
heofenura ys 8yle]> god dam de hyne
biddaj) ?

T2

yaina izwis mans, swa
yah yus tiiuyaij? im, ]?ata auk i'st wito})
yah praufoteis.

] 3 Inngaggai)? j^airh aggwu daur ; unte
])rai(l daur, yah ruuis ^vif^rs sa brigganda
iu frahistai, yah niauagai siud J)ai iuu-
galei|>audaus j^airh })ata.

14 Whan aggwu })ata daur, yah jiraih-
ans wigs, sa brigganda in Hbainai, yah
fawai sind Jjai bigitandans jjana.

15 Atsaiwhi j> swe])auh fauraliugnaprau-
fetum, j>aim izei qimand at izwis in
wastyoui himbe, i]) iuna|)ro sind wulfos
wihvandans ;

16 Bi akranam ize ufkunnaij> ins.

Ibai
lisanchi of |)aurnum weinabasya, aiJ)J)au af
wieradcinom smakkans 1

17 Swa all bagme godaize akrana goda
i)> sa ubila bagnis akrana

gatauyijj ;
ubila galauyij).

18 Ni mag bagms ]Mu|)eigs akrana
ubila gatauyan, nih bagms ubils akrana
J)iuj)ciga gatauyan.

19 All bagme ni tauyandane akrau

12 Eornustlice ealle da j^ing, de ge
wyllen dait men eow don, do)) ge him
da?t sylfe, daet ys s6j)lice se and witegena
bebod.

Ganga|> inn ))urh ^xt nearwe geat

1

fordon de da^t geat is swyde wid, and se
weg is swide riim de to forspillcdnesse
gelset, and swyde manega synt de J)urh
done weg fara|>.

14 Eala hu neara and hii angsum is
dfet geat, and se weg, de to life gclaHlt,
and swyde feawa synt de done weg
findon.'''

1

Warniaj> eow fi'am leasum witegum,
da cumaj) to eow on sceapa geg}Tclum,
ac hig beoj) innane reafigeude wulfas

16 Fram hyi*a wrestmun ge hi under-
C>\Tst du gaderaj) man win-
of |)oruum, odde fic-a^ppla
of

gytaj).
berian
J>yTucinum ?

1

Swa aelc god treow lnT}i gode wa^st-
mas ; and selc yfel treow byrj> yfele
wsestmas.

18 Ne maeg dapt gode treow beran
ytle waestmas, ne dat yfele treow gode
wa}stnms.

A\'\c treow de ne byrj^ godne w»stm,

1

god, usmaitada, yah in fou atlagyada.

sy h}i, forcorfen, and on fyr awor})cn.

20 pannu bi akranam ize ufkunnaij)

20 Witodlicc be hyra woestmum ge hig

ins.

2 I Ni whazuh saei fii|>i|' mis, Frauya,
Frauya, i*ungalci)>i}) in ))iudangardya liim-
inc ;
attins
meinis ))is in himinam.

sa tanyands

wilyan

ak

oncnawa|>.

21 Ne gse}) pelc doera on lieofena rice,
de cwy|) to me, Drihtcn, Driliten ; ac se
do wyn'j) mines faHlerwillan de on heof-
cnum is, se gcc}> on hcolcna nee.

22 ^fanagai f|i|)and mis in yainamma
daga, Frauya, Fiauya, niu |)einamma nam-
in praufctiiltMlum, yali JHMnanuna nam-
in unhul)M)ns uswanrjuim, yah jicinauima
namin nialitins mikilos gatuwidedum ?

22 ^Manege cwednji on dam da^ge to mc,
Drihten, Drihten, hit no witegode we on
dinum naman, and on dinum naman we
lit-axNiirpon deotlu, and on dinum naman
wc worhton mycle mihta ?

3

4
5
6
9
1

;

VII. 9-22.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
9 Other who of 50U is a man, whom
5if his sone axe breed, wher he shal
dresse to hym a stoou 1

TYNDALE, 1526.

31

9 Ys there eny man among you, which
wolde proffer his sonne a stone, if he
axed him breed 1

10 Other ^if he shal axe a fishe, wher

TO Or if he axed fysshe, wolde he proffer

he shal dresse to hym a serpent 1

11 Therfore 5if ^e, when ^e ben yuel
men, han knowen for to 5eue good thing-
us 50uen to 5oure sonys, hou myche
more ^oure fadir that is in heuenes shal
5eue good thingis to men axin^e hym 1

1 2 Therfore alle thingis, wliat euer
thingis 5ee wolen that men don to 30U,
and 5e do to hem, forsothe these thingis
ben the lawe and prophetis.

1

Entre ^e bi the streyt ^ate ; for the
gate that ledith to perdicioun^ is brode,
and the weye large, and ther ben many
that entren bi it.

hyme a serpent 1

1

Yff ye then, whiche are evyll, cann
geve to youre chyldren good gyftes, howe
moche moore shall youre father which ys
in heven geve good thynges to them that
axe off hym ?

12 Therfore, whatsoever ye wolde that
men shulde do to you, even so do ye to
them, this ys the lawe and the pro-
phettes.

13 Enter in at the strayte gate ; ffor
wyde is the gate, and broade ys the waye
thatt leadeth to destruccion, and many
there be which goo yn there att.

14 How streit is the 5ate, and narewe
the weye, that ledith to lijf, and there
ben fewe that fynden it.

1

For strayte ys the gate, and narowe
is the waye, that leadeth vnto lyfe, and
feawe there be that fynde it.

15 Perceyue 56, and flee fro fals pro-
phetis, the whiche cummen to 50U in
clothingis of sheepis, bot wythynne thei
ben rauyshynge wolues j

16 Of her

fruytis 5e shulen knowe
Whether men gaderen grapis of

hem.
thornys, or fijgis of breeris ?

1

Beware off falce prophettes, whiche
come to you in shepes clothynge, but in-
wardly they are ravenynge wolves

1

Ye shall knowe them by their frutes.
Do men gaddre grapes off' thornes, or
figges of bryi'es 1

17 So euery good tree makith good
fruytis ; sothely an yuel tree makith yuel
fruytis.

18 A good tree may nat make yuel
fruytis, nether an yuel tree make good
fruytis.

19 Euery tree that makith nat good
fruyt, shal be kitte douu, and shal be
sent in to the fire,

17 Even soo evry good tree bryngethe
forthe good frute ; butt a corrupte tree
bryngethe forthe evyll frute.

18 A good tree cannott brynge forthe
bad frute, nor yett a bad tree can brynge
forthe good frute.

1

Every tree that bryngethe not forthe
good frute, shalbe hewne doune, and cast
into the fyre.

20 Therfore of her fruytis jee shulen

20 Wherfore by there frutes ye shall

knowe hem.

21 Nat eche man that saith to me,
Lord, Lord, shal entre into the kyngdam
of lieucnes ; Imt he that dotli the willc
of my fadir tliat is in lieuoncH, he slial
entre in to tlie kyngdam of heuenca.

22 ^fany shul say to me in that day,
Loi'd, Lord, wliether we han nat pro-
I)hecied in thi name, and han cast out
dcuelin in tlfi name, and han don many
vcrtuea in thi name ?

knowe them.

21 Not all they thatt say vnto me,
enter into the
Master,
kyngdomc off heven ; but he that ful-
fillctli my fathers will wliich ys in lieven.

Master, shall

22 Many will saye to me yn thnt dayo,
Master, Master, have we nott in thy
name proj)heHied, and in thy name luive
we not cast oute devyls, and in thy name
liave we nott done many miracles'?

32

GOTITTC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

23 Yiih )>an aiulliaita 1111, patci ni whan-
afleij>i]j fairra mis, yus

liun kunjja izwis ;
"vvaiirkyamlans unsil)yaiia.

24 Wha/Aih nu saei hausci|> waurda
meiiia, yah tauyij? j>o, galciko i'na waira
frodarama, saei gatiinrida razn seiii ana
staiua.

25 Yah atVddya dalaj? rign, yah qemun
awhos, yah waiwouu windos, yah bistugq-
uii l)i Jninima razna yainamma ; yah ui
gadraus, uiite gasuli}) was ana staina.

23 Donne cwede ic to him, Daet icfeow
ge\\'itaj) fram me, ge de

nwfre ne ciicle
worhton unrylitwysnesse.

;

24 EornustHce a'lc diera de das mine
word gehyrjj, and da wyrc}), h\\> gehc
dam wisan were, se hys bus ofer stan
getimbrode.

25 Da Com daer ren, and mycele flod,
and da?r bleowim windas, and aliruron on
djrt bus ; and hyt mi ne fcoU, sojiHcc hit
wa3S ofer stan getimbrod.

26 Yali whazuh saei hausei|> waurda
nieiiia, yah ni tauyij> j^o, galeikoda manii
(Iwalamma, saei gatimrida razn sein ana
mabnin.

27 Yah at'iddya dalaj^ ^''^S^i J^^^ qemun
awhos, yali waiwoun windos, yah bistugq-
un bi yainamma raziia ; yah gadraus,
yah was drus is mikils.

26 And selc dfcra dc gcliyr}? das mine
word, and da ne wyrcj>, se \)'\\) gelic dam
dysigan men, de getimbrode hys bus ofer
sand-ceosel.

27 Da rinde hit, and &.vov comun flod,
and bleowun windas, and aliruron on
dxt bus ; and da?t hiis feoll, and hys
hryre wa?s myceb^

28 Yah war)?,

j)an ustauh lesus^ |>o
waurda, biabridedun manageins ana hiis-
einai is

;

29 "Was auk laisyands ins, swe waldufni

habands, yah ni swaswe bokaryos.

28 Da waes geworden, da se Hsclend
das word ge-endode, da wundrode da^t
folc his lare ;

29 S6}>nce he laerde, swylce he anweaUl
hfefde, and na swa swa hyra boeeras, and
Suudor-halgan.

Chap. VIII. i Dalaj) |mn atgaggandin
inima af fairgunya, laistidedun afar im-
ma iumyons manages.

2 Yah sai ! manna |)rutsfill liabands
duri inlands in wait ina, qi|)ands, Frauya,
yal)ai wilcis, magt mik gahrainyan.

3 Yah ufrakyands handu, attaitok Vm-
ma, qi|:aii(ls, Wilyan, wairj) lirains. Yah
suns brain war)) jiata j)nits[ill is.

4 Yah qa|) imma lesus, Saiwh, ei mann
ni (p|»ais ; ak gagg, j^uk silban ataiigei
gudyin, yah atbair gi])a |)oei anabau|>
Moses, du weitwodi|)ai im.

5 Afarnh |>an jmta innatgaggantbn im-
ma in K:irarnauni,duatiddya imma hunda-
faj>s, l)idynnds ina,

6 Yah (lil'aiids, Frauya, |iiumagus mcins

Hgi)> in garda uslijm, hardul)a l)alwi|>s.

Chap. VIII. i S6|)bce da se H;vlend^
of dam mimte nyder-astah, da fybgdon
liym mycle ma^iio.

2 Da gcnealjehte an hreofla to him, and
bine to liim ge-eadmedde, and dus cw.i»)>,
Drihton, g}'f du wylt, dii miht me ge-
ela'nsian.

3 D.'i astrehte se HrckMid hys hand, and
lirepock^ liyne, and dus cwa^|\ le wylU»,
1)00 gechvnsod. And hys hreoila wa-s
hrfedbce gecbrnsod.

4 Da ewa^)> se Hadond to him, ^^'arna
de, da^t dii h^i; nrcnegum men ne secge ;
ac gang, aeteowe de dam saeerde, and
bring liym da hie dc Moyses bebead,
on hyra gecydnesse.

5 Sojibcc da se HcTlend ineode on
Capharnaum, d;i genealcchtc hym an
liuiub'odes eaklor, liyne biddende,
6 And dus cwanlende, Drihton, mn
cnapa \\]> on minum huse lama, and mid
yWv ge|>read.

yiL 23.-VIII. 6.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
23 And than Y shal knowliche to hem,
For I knewe 30U neuer ; departe awey
fi'O me, 36 that worchen wickidnesse.

24 Therforeeche man that herith these
my wordis, and doth hem, shal be maad
liche to a ^vijse man, that hath bildid his
hous Y])on. a stoon.

25 And rayn came doun, and flodis
camen, and wyndis blewen, and rusheden
in to that hous ; and it felie nat doun,
for it was foundid on a stoon.

26 And euery man that herith these my
wordis, and doth hem nat, is liche to a
man fool, that hath bildid his hous on
grauel."^

27 And rayn came doun, and floodis
camen, and wyndis blewen, and thei
liurliden in to that hous ; and it
felle
doun, and the fallyng doun therof was
grete.

28 And it is maad, when Jhesus hadde
eendid these wordis, the cumpanyes won-
dreden on his techyng ;

29 Sothely he was techynge hem, as a
man hauynge power, and nat as the
scribis of hem, and Pharisees.

TYNDALE, 1526.

33

23 And then will I knowlege vnto them,
That I never knewe them ; depart from
me, ye workers of iniquite.

24 Whosoever hearethe off me these
saynges, and doethe the same, I wyll
lyken hyme vnto a wyseman, which byllt
his housse on a rocke.

25 And aboundance off rayne descended,
and the fluddes cam, and the wynddes
blewe, and bett vppon that same housse ;
and it was not over throwen, because it
was grounded on the rocke.

2 6 And whosoever heareth of me these
sainges, and doth not the same, shalbe
lykened vnto a folysh man, which bilt
his housse apon the sonde.

27 Andabundaunce of rayne descended,
and the fluddes cam, and the wynddes
blewe, and beet vppon that housse ; and
it was over throwen, and great was the
fall off it.

28 And it cam to passe, that when
Jesus had ended these saynges, the peple
were astonnied at his doctryne ;

29 For he taught them, as one havynge

power, and not as the scribes.

Chap. VIII. i Forsothe when Jhesus
hadde comen doun fro the hil, many
cumpanyes folewiden hym.

2 And loo !

a leprouse man cum-
mynge worshipide hym, sayinge, Lord,
5if thou wolt, thou maist make me clene.

Chap. VIII. i When Jesus was come
downe from the mountayne, moch people
folowed him.
2 And lo !

there cam a lepre and
worsheped him, saynge, Master, if thou
wylt, thou canst make nje clene.

3 And Jhesus,

holdynge for the the
bond, touchide hym, sayinge, I wole,
And anoon the
l>e thou maad clene.
kpre of hym was clensid.
4 And Jhesus saith to hym. See, say
thou to no man ; but go, shewe thee
to prcstis, and offre that ^iftc that
Moyscs comaundide, in to witnessing
to hem.

5 Sothely when he hadde cntride in
to

to Caphamauni, centurio
hym, j)reyingc hym,

nci5idc

6 And saidc, Lord, my child lyeth in
the hous Hike on the pulsie, and is yuel
tournicntid.

3 He putt forthe

and
touched him, saynge, I wyll, be clene.
And immcdiatly his leprosy was clensed.

bond,

his

4 And Jesus said vnto him, Sc, thou
tell no man ; but go, and shewe thysilf
to the preste, and offer the gyftc that
Moses commaundcd to be offrcd,
in
witnos to them.

5 When Jesus was entrcd in to Cnper-
nauni, there cam vnto him a certayno
Centurion, besechyng liim,

6 And saynge. Master, my servaunt ly-
ctli sickc utt home off the palsye, aiu'
is grcvously payncd.

D

1

34

GOTHIC, 360.

7 Yah qii}> du imma lesus, ik qiniaiids

galiailya i'na.

8 Yah andhafyands sa hnndafajis f|a|>,
Frauya, ni 1111 wair|)S, ei iif hrot iiieiu
innfjfai,'j,'ais ; ak ))ataiuci (\\\> waurda, yah
gahaihiij) sa jjiumagus meins.

9 Yah auk ik manna i'm hahands uf
"Nvaldufiiya meinamma gadrauhtins ; yah
qij>a du ))amma, Gagg, yali gaggi[) ; yah
; yah du
anj)aranima, Qini, yah qiniij)
skalka meinamma, Tawei |)ata, yah tau-

10 Gahausyands ])an lesus sildaleikida,
yah qaj) du })aim afarlaistyandam, Amen
qij)a i/wis, ni in Israela swalauda gahmb-
ein bigat.

1

A})|)an qijja izwis, j^atcl managai fi-am
mTunsa yah saggqa qimand, yah aua-
kumbyand mi]) Abraliama yah Isaka yah
lakoba "in j;iudangardyai himine ;

12 Ijj

|)ai sunyus |)iudangardyos us-
wairpanda in
jnita hinduniisto ;
yainar '\vairj)i{> grets, yah krusts tunj^iwe.

ricps

9
3
6
1

;

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
7 Da cwsej) se HcClcnd to him, Ic cunie,

[St. Matt.

and hyne gehirle.

8 Da andswarode sc hundredes ealdor
and dus ewtE|>, Drihten, ne eom ic wyrde,
clast dii ingange under mine jiecene ; ac
cwe}> d'n an word, and min cnapa bi]>
geha'led.

9 S6})lice ic eom man under anwealde
geset, and ic hiebbe })egnas under me
and ic cwcde to dysum, Gang, and he
gaj) ; and ic cwede to odrum, Cum,
and he cym)? ; to minum jieowe, ^Vyrc
dis, and lie wyrc}).

10 Witodlice d;i se Hselend, dis gehyrde,
da wundrode he, and cwaej? to dam de
hym fyligdon,
ic secge eow, ne
gcmette ic swa mycclne geleafan on
Israhel.

So|>

1

To s6|)um ic secge cow, da?t man-
ige cuma}) fram east-da-le and west-
da-le, and A^imia}) mid Abraliame and
Isahace and lacobe on heofena rice ;

12 Witodh'ce discs

rices bcarn beo|>
aworpene on da ytemestan |»ystro ; dajr
bij) wop, and t6j)a gristbitung.

13 Yah qa|> lesus )?amma hundafada,
Gagg, yah swaswe galaubides, wair))ai
Yah galiailuoda sa ])iumagus is in
)>us.
yainai whcihu.

14 Yah qimands lesus in garda Pai-
traus, yah gasawh swaihron is ligandein
in heitom.

1

And se Hselend cw£ej> to dam hund-
rydes ealdre, Ga, and gewurde de, swa
swa du gclyfdest. And se cnapa wjes
gehaeled on divre tide.^

14 Da se Haelend com on Petres huse,
da geseah he hys swegre licgendc, and
hrijngende.

15 Yah attaitok handau izos, yah aflai-
lot iya so heito ; yali urrais, yah aud-
balitida imnia.

16 At andanahtya |)an waurjianamma,
atl)cruii du Vinnia daiinonaryans manag-
ans, yali uswarp jians alnnans waurda, yah
allans j)ans ubil habandaus galiailida;

17 Ei usfulhiodedi, ))ata gamclido J'airli
Esaian, praufetu, (ji}>andan, Sa unmalit-
ins unsaros usnam, yah sauhtins usbar.

18 Gasaiwhands j>an lesus managnns
hiulimans bi sik, haihait galei)>an sipou-
yajis liindar marein.

19 Yah (hiatgagganda ains bokarcis,
qa|) du imma, Laisari, laistya ))uk, j'is-
whaduh padci gaggis.

15 And he aethran byre hand, and se
fcfor hig forlet ; da aras heo, and jjeuode
hiin.

1

S6|>lice da hyt jefen wses, hig broht-
on liim manege deofol-seoce, and lie
ut adrjufde da unclainan gastas mid hys
worde, and be ealle geha?kle da yfel-
lia'bl)endan :

17 Da^t wa^rc gefyllcd, da^t de gecwcd-
cn is |)urh P^saiam, done witegan, dus
cwedende, lie onfeng lire untrumncssa,
and he aba^' ure adla.

18 Da goscah sc Ihvlcnd mycle menig-
eo ymbiitan hyne, da bet he hig farau
ofor done mii|ian.''"

1

Dji gcneala'htc him an bocere, and
cwa»)), Lareow, ic fylige de, swa hwaidcr
swa du faM\st.

1

;

;

3

;

;
;

VIII. 7-T9] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

35

7 And Jhesus saith to hym, I slial

7 And Jesus sayd vnto him, I wyll

curae, and slial hele hym.

8 And centurio answerynge saith to
hym, Lord, I am not worthi, that thou
entre vndir my roof; but oonly say
bi word, and my child shal be helid.

9 For whi and I am a man ordeynd
vnder power, hauynge vndir me kni3tis j
and I say to this, Go, and he goth
and to an other, Come thou, and he
Cometh ; and to my seruaunt, Do thou
this thing, and he doth.

10 Sothely

Jhesus, heerynge

these
thingis, wondride, and saide to men
suynge hym, Trewly I saye to 50U, I
fonde nat so grete feith in Yrael.

1

Sothely Y say to 50U, that manye
shulen come fro the est and west, and
shulen rest with Abraham and Ysaac
and Jacob in the kyngdam of heuenes j
12 Forsothe the sonys of the rewme
to vttremest
there shal be weepynge,

shulen be cast out in
derknessis ;
and beetynge togidre of teeth.

13 And Jhesus saide to centurio, Go,
and as thou hast bileeued, be it don to
thee. And the child was helid fro that
houre.

14 And when Jhesus hadde comen in
to the hous of Syraond Petre, he say his
wjTJcs moder liggynge, and shakun with
feueris.

15 And he touchide hir hond, and the
feuer lefte hir ; and she roose, and
seruyde hem.

16 Sothely whan the euenyng was
maad, thei brou3te to hym many hau-
ynge deuelys, and he castide out spiritis
])y word, and helide alle hauynge yuel

17 Tliat it shulde be fulfillid, tluit tiling
that was said by Ysaic, the prophete,
sayinge, He toke oure infirmytces, and
here oure sykcnessis.

18 Sothely Jhesus secyngc many cum-
panyes about hym, bad his dlsc'qdis go
ouer the water,

19 And 00 scribe^ commynge to, Hnide
to hym, Maistrc, I shal sue thee, whidir
cucr thou shalt go.

come, and cure him.

8 The Centurion answered and saide,
Syr, I am not worthy, that thou shuldest
com vnder the rofe of my housse ; but
speake the worde only, and my servaunt
shalbe healed.
9 For Y also my selfe am a man vndre
power, and . have sowdeeres vndre me ;
and Y saye to one, Go, and he goeth
and to anothre. Come, and he cometh
and to my servaunt, Do this, and he
doeth it.

10 When Jesus herde these saynges,
he marveyled, and said to them that
folowed him, Verely Y say vnto you,
I have not founde so great fayth, no,
not in Israeli.

Ill say therfore vnto you, that many
shall come from the eest and weest, and
rest with Abraham Ysaac and
shall
Jacob in the kyngdom of heven

1 2 And the children of the kingdom
shalbe cast out in to the vtmoost derck-
nes ; there shalbe wepinge, and gnassh-
ing of tethe.

1

Then Jesus said vnto the Centurion,
Go thy waye, and as thou hast beleued,
so be it vnto the. And his servaunt was
healed that same houre.

14 And Jesus went into Peters housse,
and sawe his wyves mother lyinge sicke
of a fevre.

15 And he thouched her hande, and
the fevre leeft her ; and she arose, and
ministred vnto them.

16 When the even was come, they
brought vnto him many that were pos-
sessed with devylles, and he cast out the
spiritcs with a worde, and healed all that
were sicke ;

17 To fulfill that whichc was spoken
by Esay, the jirophct, saingc, lie toke
on him oure infirmytes, and bare oure
sicknesses.

18 When Jesus saw moche people about
liim, he commaunded to go over the
water.

19 And there cam a scribe, and said
vnto him, Master, I woll folowe the,
whythersumcver thou gocst.

1) 2

36

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

20 Yah qaj) dii iiiima Icsus, Faulions
gi'ohos aigun, yali fiiLjlos liiiuinis sitlaiis,
i{) sunns mans ni liabai|> whar baubij)
sein analinaiwyai.

21 Anjjariih |ian siponye is qa}) du iin-
ma, Frauya, uslaubei mis frumist galeijj-
an, ytih gafilhan attan meinana.

22 I}) lesiis (ja}> (hi iinnia, Laistei afar
mis, yah let jjaus daupans filhan seinans
dau[)ans.

23 Yah innatgaggandin imma i'n skip,

afariddyedun inmia siponyos is.

24 Yah sai ! wegs mikils war)) in mar-
ein, swaswe jjata skip gahuli[) wairjjan
frani wcgini ;

i]) is saislep.

25 Yah duatgaggandans siponyos 'is,
urraisideduii ina,(p|)audans, Frauya, nasei
unsis ; fraqistnam.
26 Yah qa)) du im lesus, Wha faurht-
eijj Icitil galaul)yandans ? panuh urreis-
ands gasok wiiidain yah marein, yah
war]? wis mikil.

27 1{) ))ai mans siklaleikidediin, qij-^and-
ans, Whilciks ist sa, ei yah windos yah
marei ufiiausyand imma 1
28 Yah qimanchn imma hindar marein
Gairgai^^aine, gamotidedun
'in
'imma twai daimonaryos, us hlaiwasnom
rinnandaiis, slcidyai fihi, swaswe ni malita
maima ualei})aii J^airh |)aua wig yainaiia.

gauya

29 Yah sai !

hropi(U^dun, qi|)andans,
Wha uns yah J)us, Icsu, sunau Gu]'S ?
qamt her faur mel balwyaii unsis ?

20 Dji cwa'|) so Haelcnd to him, Foxas
habbaj) holu, and heofen:in fuglas nest,
s6j)lice mannes sunu naef)) bwaer he hys
heafod ahylde.

21 Dji c\\x\> to him 6(ter of hys leorn-
ing-cnihtum, Drihten, alyfe me serest to
farenne, and bebyrigean niinne fader.

22 Da cwa^ji se Hadend to him, Fylig
me, and Iset deade bebyrigean hyra
dcadan.^

23 And he astah on sc}"p, and hys

leorning-enyhtas hym fyligdon.

24 Da wear)) mycel styrung geworden
on diere sse, swa tta^t diet scyp wear))
ofergoten mid yctum ; witodlioe he slep.
25 And liig genealsehton, and hy aweht-
on hyne, ttus cwettende, Drihten, haele
us : we moton forwurttan.

26 Da cwa?}) he to him. To hwi synt ge
forhte ge lytles geleafan 1 Da ilras he
and behead dam winde and da^re sse,
and daer wear)) gewordeu mycel smylt-
ness.

27 Gewisslice da men wundrodun, and
dus cwacdon, Hwa^t is des, diet windas
and ScE him hyrsumiaj^ 1

28 Da se Hielend com ofer ^oric mu))-
an on Geraseniscra rice, da union him
togenes twegen de haefdon deofol-seoc-
nesse, of byrgenum utgangende, da wacr-
on swide rede, swa da't nan man ne
milite faran )mrh done weg.

29 And hig hrymdon, and cwjrdon. La !
Ha?lend, Godes sunu, hwat ys ile and
us gemscne ? come dii hider aer tide us
to [irengenne 1

30 Wasuh JKin fairra im hairda sweinc

30 Da'r wtes s6)dice unfeorran swyna

managaize liahlana.

31 \\> })o skolisla bcdun ina, qilandans,
Yabai uswairpi.s uns. ushiubei uns galeijj-
an in |)o luiirda swcine.

iin, Gaggi|\

32 Yah (jaj) (hi

1|> eis
usgaggan(hins gab'|)un in liairda swoine ;
yali sai ! run gawaurhtedun sis aUa so
liairda an<l driuson in marein, yah ga-
dau[>n()dednn in watnam.

33 ^1'

1'=" lialdandans ga]'lauhun, yah

galcil'andans gataihun in banrg all
J)ans daiuKmaryans.

bi

34 Yah sai !

alia so baurgs us'iddya

heord manegra manna hvswiende.

31 Da deoHa s6{)lice hyne banlon, dus
cwedcnde, Gyf dii us lit-adrifst, ascnde
us on das swina lieorde.

32 Dii cwa'j) he to livm, Faraj).

And
hig da utgangende ferdon on da swin ;
and da'r rilite ferde call seo heord niyc-
lum onrsese niwel on da sa?, and hig
wurdou deade on dam wa^terc.

33 Da hyrdas witodlice flugon, and
comun on da ceastic, and cyd<lon eallc
das j'ing, and be dam de da deoful-
scocnyssa luvfdon.

34 Da code eall seo ccaster-waru to-

1

VIII. 20-34-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

20 And Jhesus said to liym, Foxis han
dichis/ and briddis of the eir han nestis,
but mannes sone hath nat wher he reste
his heued.

2

Sotheli an other of his disciplis saide
to hym, Lord, suffre me go first, and
birye my fadir.

22 Forsothe Jhesus saide to hym, Sue
thou me, and late dede men birye her
dead men.

23 And Jhesu steyinge vp in to a litel

ship, his disciplis sueden hym.

24 And loo ! a gi-ete steryng was maad
in the see, so that the litil ship was hilid
with wawis ; but he slepte.

25 And his disciplis camen ni3 to hym,
and raysiden hym, sayinge. Lord, saue
vs ; we perishen.

26 And Jhesus seith to hem, What ben
5ee of litil feith agast 1 Thanne he rys-
ynge comaundide to the wyndis and the
see, and a grete pesiblenesse is maad.

27 Forsothe men wondreden, sayinge,
What manere man is he this, for the
wyndis and the see obeishen to hym %

28 And whan Jhesus hadde comen ouer
the water in to the cuntre of men of
Genazei;eth, twey men hauynge deuelis
runnen to hym, goynge out fro birielis,
ful feerse,^ so that no man mi3te passe
by that wey.

29 And loo !

thei crieden, sayinge.
What to vs and to thee, Jhesu, the
sone of God ? hast thou comen liidir
before tlie tyme for to tourmente vs 1

30 Sothcly a fioc^ of many hoggis

lesewynge was nat fer from hem.

31 But the deuelis preyedcn hira, sey-
inge, 3if tliou castist out vs liennes, sende
VH in to the droue of hoggis.

32 And he saith to hem, Go ^ee. And
thei goynge out wente in to the lioggis ;
and loo !
in a greet hire al the (h'oue
wente heedlynge in to the see, and thei
ben dead in watris.

TYNDALE, 1526.

37
20 And Jesus said vnto him, The foxes
have holes, and the bryd of the aier
have nestes, but the sonne of the man
hath not where on to leye his heede.

21 Anothre that was one of hys dis-
ciples seyd vnto him, Master, suffre me
fyrst to go, and burye my father.

22 But Jesus said vnto him, Folowe

me, and let the deed burie their deed.

23 And he entred in to a shyppe, and

his disciples folowed him.

24 And lo ! there arose, a greate storme
in the see, in so moche that the shippe
was hyd with waves ; and he was aslepe.
25 And his disciples cam vnto him,
and awocke hym, sayinge. Master, save
vs ; we peri she.

26 And he said vnto them. Why are
ye fearfull o ye endewed with lytell
faithe 1 Then he arose and rebuked the
wyndes and the see, and there folowed a
greate calme.

27 And men marveyled, and said, What
man is this, that bothe wyndes and see
obey hym %

28 And when he was come to the other
syde in to the countre off the Gergesens,
there met him two possessed of devylles,
which cam out off the graves, and were
out off measure fearce, so that no man
myght go by that waye.

29 And lo ! they cryed out, saynge, O
Jesn, the sonne off God, what have we
to do with thee ? art thou come hyther
to torment vs before the tyme be come ?
30 There was a good waye off from

them a greate heerd of swyne fedingc.

31 Then the devyles besought him,
saynge. If thou cast vs out, suffre vs to
go oure waye into the heerd of swyne.

32 And he said vnto them. Go youre
Then went they out and de-
wayes.
parted into the licerd of swyne ; and lo !
all the heerd of swyne was caryed with
see, and
into
violence
perisshcd in the water.

liedlingc

the

33 Forsothe the hirdcR fhdden awcy,
and cuniniynge in to the citee, tolden
alie these thingis, and of licin that liad-
dcn the f(;udi.s.
34 And loo ! al the citcc wente a^cinis

33 Then the heerdmen flcod, and wont
there ways into the cite, and tohh' cvoy
thinge, and what hud fortuned vnto them
that wen' ])OHseHsod of the devyls.

34 And lo ! all the cite cam out, and

1

1

38

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

wi|)ra icsu ; yah nrasaiwhantlans ma, bcd-
uu ei usli])i hiudar markos "ize.

geanes dam Hsclcnde ; and tta da liig
hyne gesawun, da bsedon hig hyne, dajt
he ferde fram heora gemserum.

CiiAP. IX. I Yali atstcigancls 'in skip,

ufarlai|>, yah qam in scinai baurg.

•CnAP. IX.

I Da astah he on scyp,
and ofcr-seglode, and com on his ceastre.

2 paniih atbcinin du I'mma usH}5an,ana
Yah gasaiwhands Icsus
li<:^ra liij^andan.
gahiul)cin ize, qa|> du jiamma uslijjin,
prafstei }>uk, barnilo ; afletanda jjus fra-
waurhteis fieinos.

2 Da brohton hig hym senne himan, on
bedde licjjjende. Da <;eseah se Haelend
h)Ta geleafan, and cwa*}) to dam hmian,
La beam, gelyfe de ; beoJ> dine synna
forgifene.

3 paruh suraai ]>\ze bokarye qe|)un "in

sis silbam, Sa wayamerei[).

4 Yah witands lesiis ])os mitonins ize,
qaj), Duvvhe yus mitojj ubila in hairtam
izwaraini 1

5 Whajjar ist raihtis azetizo qij^an,
Afletanda |)us frawaurhteis, |)au qijmn,
Urreis, yah gagg ?

6 A|?|)an ei witei}), |>atei waldufni habai}>
sa sunns mans ana airj^ai afleitan Ira-
waurhtins, jianuh qaj) du |)amma usli))in,
Urreisands ; nim j^ana ligr jjeinana, yah
gagg in gard j^einana.

7 Yah urreisands, galai]> 'in gard sein-

ana.

8. Gasaiwliandcins ]>an manageins, oht-
edun sildaleikyandans, yah mikilidedun
Gu}>, Jjana gibandan waldufni swaleikata
mannam.

9 Yah pairhleijjands lesus yainjiro, ga-
sawh mannan sitandan at motai, Ma|)|iaiu
haitaiiana. Yah qa}> du imma, Laistei
Yah usstandands, iddya afar
afar mis.
imma.

10 Yah war]), bijie is anakumbida in
garda, yah sai ! managai motaryt)S yah
frawaurhtai qimandans mijianakumbide-
dun lesua yah siponyam is.

1

Yah gaumyandans Fareisaicis qej^un
du j)aim siponyam is, Duwhc mi)> motar-
yam yah frawaurhtaim matyi[) sa hiisarcis
izwar ?

12 I|) losus gahansyands, qaj) du im,
Ni jiaurbun hailai Ickois, ak jnii unliaili
habandnns.

3 Da cwsedon^ sume da boceras hira

bctwinan, Des sprycj? bysmor-spncce.

4 Da se Haelend geseah hyra ge|?anc,
da cwsej) he, To hwi jjence ge yfel on
eowrum heortum 1
5 Hwcct is eadelicre to CNvedenne, De
beo|) forgyfene dine synna, odde to cwed-
anne, A'ris, and ga 1

6 Dret ge s6})lice witon, da^t mannes
sunu liajf}^ anweald on eor])an synna to
forg^-fenne, da cwsej) he to dam laman,
A'ris ; nym din bedd, and gang on din
hiis.

7 And he aras, and ferde to hys huse.

8 S6|>lice da da seo m.Tnigeo dis gessiw-
on da ondredon hig hym, and wuldrod-
on God, de sealde swylcne anweald man-
num.^

9 Da se Haelend danon ferde, he geseah
senne man sittende a?t toU-sceamule, dii?s
nama wa^s Matheus. And he cwa^j> to
him, Fylig me. And he aras, and fyligdc
him.

10 And hyt wa^a gcwordcn, dsi he s.Tt
innan hiisc, da conum manega nuinfullc
and synfulle and sseton mid dam Haelende
and mid hys leorning-cnyhtum.

1

Da da Sundor-halgan da^t gesawon
da cwsedon hig to hys leorning-cnyhtum,
Hwi yt eowor lareow mid manfullum
and synfullum 1

12 And se Hjvlend cwnej) dis gehyrende,

Nys halum Ijrces nan })earf, ac seocum.

13 Ajijjan gaggaij) ganimijj wha siyai,

J 3 Ga j> s6))liee and leornigea}) hwa^t is.

2
1

IX. I-I3.] ' WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

39

Jhesu, metynge liym ; and hym seen,
thei preiden hym^ that he shulde passe
fro her coostis.

met Jesus ; and when they sawe him,
they besought him to departe out off
there costtes.

Chap. IX.

i And Jhesus, goyng vp
in to a boot, passide ouer the water, and
came in to his citee.

2 And loo ! thei offreden to h}Tn a man
For-
syke in palsie, ligg}Tige in a bed.
sothe Jhesus, seeynge the feith of hem,
saide to the man sike in palsie, Sone,
haue thou trust ; thi synnes ben for-
3euen to thee.

3 And lo ! sum of the scribis said with

ynne hem self, This blasfemeth.

4 And when Jhesus hadde seen her
thou^tis, he said, \Yherto thenken 3e
yuel thingis in ^our hertis ?

5 What is li3ter to saye, Thi synnes
ben for3euen to thee, other to saye, Ryse
thou, and walke %

6 Forsothe that 56 wite, that mannes
sone hath power to for3eue synnes in
erthe, thanne he saide to thilke man in
palsie, Ryse vp ; take thi bed, and go
in to thin house.

7 And he roose, and wente in to his

Chap. IX.

i And he entred into the
shippe, and passed over, and cam into
his awne cite.

2 And lo ! they brought vnto him a
man sicke off the palsey, lyinge in his
bed. And when Jesus sawe there faith,
he said to the secke off the palsey,
Sonne, be off good chere j thy sinnes
are foryeven the.

3 And lo ! certeyne of the scribes said

in them selves, He blasphemeth.

4 And when Jesus sawe there thoughtes,
he said, Wherfore thinke ye evyll in your
herttes ?

5 Whether ys esyer to saye, Thi sinnes
ar foryeven the, or to saye, Arise, and
walke 1

6 That ye may knowe, that the sonne
of man hathe power to foryeve synnes
in erth, then sayd he vnto the sicke of
the palsey, Aryse ; take vppe thi beed,
and go home to thyne housse.

7 And he arose, and departed to his

house.

housse.

8 Sothely the companyes seeynge dred-
den, and glorifiedcn God, that 3aue siche
power to men.

8 The people that sawe it marveylled,
and glorified God, which had geven
suche power to men.

9 And when Jhesus passide thennis, he
sei3 a man sittynge in a tolbothe, Matheu
And he saide to hym, Sue
by name.
And he, rysynge, folowide
thou me.
hym.

10 And it is don, hym sittynge at the
mete in the house, loo ! many pupli-
canys and synneful men cummyngc suteu
at the mete with Jhesu and his disciplis.

T I And Pharisees seeynge saiden to his
disciplis, Whi etith 3oure maistcr with
puplicanys and synful men ?

12 And Jhesus hcrynge saide, A Icche
is nat node to men that faren wel, but
to men hauynge yuol.

9 And as Jesus passed forth from
thence, he sawe a man sytt at the re-
ceyte off custume, named Matheu. And
said to him, Folowe me. And he arose,
and folowed him.

10 And hit cam to passe, thatt Jesus
satt at mcate in his housse, and lo!
many puljlicans and synners cam and
satt downe also with Jesus and his
disciples.

1

When the Pharyses had pcrceaved
that they sayd vnto hys disciples. Why
cateth youre master with publicans and
synners ?

1

When J0SU8 hcrdc that he Ray<lo
vnto them, The whole ncadc not the
visicioii, but they thatt are Hickc.

13 Sothely 3ec goyngc Icrnc what it is,

13 Goo and Icarnc what that mcancth,

;

40

GOTinC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

Arinaliairtijni wilyau, yah ni liuiisl ; ni}i-
uswaurlitaiis, ak fia-
J)uu ([am,
>vaurhtaus.

la])OU

Ic wylle mild-hcortnesse, uses onsa^gd-
sol^liee ne com ic, rihtwibc to
nesse ;
gecigeanne, ac da synnfullan.^

14 panuh atiddyeduii siponyos lolian-
ncs, qi})aiulans, Duwhe weis yah Farei-
saicis fastam lilu, ij> jjai siponyos jjcinai
ni fastand 1

14 Da genealaehton lohannes Icorning-
cnihtas to hym, and tlus^ cwscdon, Hwi
faeste we and cla Sundor-hal«;an <rel6m-
dine leorning-cnihtas ne
lice,

s6})lice

15 Yah qa|> du "im lesus, Ibai magun
sunyus ])ru|>f'adis qainon, und ))ata wheil-
os |)ei mi[) im ist bru|)fa|)s?
1|) atgagg-
and^ dagos,
sa
bru])faj)s, yah j^an fastand.

jjan afnimada af ini

16 A|))>an ni whashun lagyi|> du plata
fanan |nirihis ana snagan fairnyana ; unte
afnimij) fullon af })amma snagin, yah
wairsiza gataura wairj^i]?.

17

ai[?})au

fairnyans,

Ni|)-]7an giutand wein niuyata i'n
distaurnand
balgins
balgeis, bil)cli j'an yah wein usgutni|>,
Ak giutand
yali balgeis fraqistnand.
wein yuggata in balgins niuyans, yah
bayojjum gabairgada.

fiestaj) 1

15 And se Haelend cwae}) to him, Cwede
ge sceolun daas brydguman cnihtas wep-
an, da hwile de se bi-ydguma mid hym
S6))lice da dagas cumaj), divt se
by[> ]
brydguma by)> afyrred fi-am hym, and
donne on dam dagum^ hig fajsta[).

16 Ne de}> witodlice nan man niwcs
clades scyp on eald reaf ; he to-bryc{> hys
stede on dam rcafe, and se slite bij> dc
wyrsa.

17 Ne hig ne d6}> niwe win on ealde
d6)>, da bytta beoj> to-
b}tta, gyf hi
brocene, and daet win agoten, and da
Ac liig i\6]> niwe win
bytta forwurda|>.
on niwe bytta, and a?gder byj) gehealden.^

18 Mi})|nuiei

is rodida })ata du 'im,
Jjaruh reiks ains qimands, inwait ina,
qijnxnds |)atei, Dauhtar meina nu gaswalt
akei qimands, atlagei handu jjeina ana
iya, yah libai|>.

19 Yah urreisands lesus iddya afar

imma, yah siponyos is.

20 Yah sai ! qino blojiarinnandci .ib.
wlntruns, duatgaggandci aftaro, attaitok
skauta wastyos is.

18 Da he^ das Ymg to him spripc, da
genealsehte an ealdor, and ge-eadmedde
hyne to him, dus ewedende, Drihten,
min dohtor is dead ; ac cum, and sete
dine hand uppan hig, and hco lyt'a[».

19 And se Haelend aras and fyligde

hym, and hys leorning-cnihttis.

20 .Vnd da an wif de ))olo(le blcnl-ryne
twclf gear, gencala?hte wida3ftan, and
sethran hys reafes fna?d.

21 Qa}mh auk in sis, Yabai ))atainei

atteka wastyai is, ganisa.

22 1|) Icsus gawandyands sik, yah ga-
saiwhands J)o, (jaji, prafstei |)uk, daulitar;
Yah
galaubcins |>cina ganasida |)uk.
ganas so qino fram J)izai wht'ilai yainai.

23 Yah qimands lesus in garda jus
reikis, yah gasaiwimnds swiglyans, yah
haurnyans haurnyandans, yah managein
auhyondoin,

24 Qa|> du im, Atlei))ij>, unte ni gaswalt
Yah bililohun ina.

80 mawi, ak slepij).

21 Heo cwapj' s6|>lice on h}Te mode,
For an ic beo hal, gyf ic hys reafes
a'thrine.

22 And se Hielend bewcnde hyne,
and hig geaeah, and cw.t}>, Gelyf, dohtor ;
din geleafa de geluelde. And da^t wif
wits gehalled on diere tide.

23 And da se IIa?lend com into does
caldres healle, and geseah hwistleras, and
hlydcnde mcnigeo,

24 lie cw.t|>, Ga|) heonun, nys dys
manlen dead, s6|>lice ac heo slacpj'. And
hig teeldon hyne.

IX. 14-24] WYCLIFFE,.i389.
Y wole mercye, and nat sacrifice ; for-
sothe Y came, nat to clepe ri3tful men,
hot synfiil men.

14 Thanne the disciplis of Joon camen
ni^e to bym, sayinge, Whi we and Phari-
sees fasten ofte, but thi disciplis fasten
nat?

15 And Jhesus saide to hem, "Whether
the sonys of the spouse"'' mow weilen,"*"
how longe the spouse is with hem ?
Sothely days shulen come, when the
spouse shal be taken awey fro hem, and
thamie thei shulen faste.

16 Sothely no man sendith ynne a
medlynge of rudee''' clothe in to an olde
sothely, he takith awey the
clothe;
plente of it fro the clothe, and a wors
kittyng is maad.

17 Nether men senden newe wijne in
to olde botelis,''" ellis the wijn vessels
ben broken, and the wijn is shed out,
and the wijn vessellis perishen.
But
men senden newe wijn in to newe wijn
vessellis, and bothe ben kept.

18 Jhesu spekynge these thingis to
hem, loo ! 00 prince came to, and wor-
shipid hym, sayinge. Lord, my dou3tir
is now dead ; but cume thou, and put
thin bond vpon hire, and she shal lyue.
19 And Jhesus rysynge suede hym,

and his disciplis.

20 And loo ! a womman that suffride
the flix^ of blood tweluc ^cer, cam to
byhynde, and touchide the hemme of his
clothe.

21 Sothely she saide with ynne hir
self, 3if I touche oonly the clothis of
hym, I shal be saaf.

22 And Jhesus tumyde, and seeynge
hir, saide, Dou3ter, liaue thou trust ; thi
And tlie
faith hath made thee saaf.
woniman was maud saaf fro that houre.

23 And wlicn Jlicsus came in to tlic
hous of tlie prince, and sec3 mynstrclis,
and the companye makyngc noyse,

1

TYNDALE, 1526.

41

I have pleasure in mercy, and not in
ofFerynge ; for I am not come to call
the rightewes, but the sinners to repent-
aunce.

1 4 Then cam the desciples of Jhon to
hym, saynge, Why do we and the Farises
fast ofte, but thy disciples fast not ?

15 And Jesus sayde vnto them, Can
the weddynge chyldren morne, as longe
as the bridegrom is with them 1
The
tym will come, when the brydgrome
shalbe tacken awaye from them, and
then shall they faste.

16 Noo man peceth an olde garment
with a pece off newe cloothe ; for then
tacketh he away the pece agayne from
rent ys made
the garment, and the
worsse.

17 Nether do men put newe wyne into
olde vessels, for then the vessels breake,
and the wyne runneth oute, and the
But they powre newe
uessels perysshe.
wyne into newe vessels, and so are both
saved togedder.

18 Whyls he thus spake vnto them,
there cam a certayne ruler, and
lo !
worshipped hyme, saynge, My doghter
is deed all redy ; but com, and lay thy
honde on her, and she shall live.

19 And Jesus arose and folowed hym,

with hys disci})les.

20 And beholde ! a woman which was
diseased with an issue of bloud xij yeres,
cam behyndc hym, and toched the hem
off' hys vesture.

2

For she sayd in her silfe, Yff" I maye
toche but even his vesture only, I shal
be safe.

22 Jesus tourned hym about, and bc-
her, saynge. Dough ter, be off
helde
goode comfoite ; thy fayth hath made
the safe. And she was made whole even
that same houre.

23 And when Jesus cam into the ruclers
housse, and sawe the minstrels, and the
people wondrynge,

24 He saide,

(Jo 30 awey, for the
wenche is nat dead, but slcpith. And
thei scornydcn hym.

24 Jle sayde vnto them, Get you hence,
for the nuiyde is not deed, but slepeth.
And they Icughc hym to seorne.

42

GOTHIC, 360.

25 pjiniili jiaii us(lril)anii war|i so man-
liandu

inn, lialjaida

agei, atpig^^^aiids
i'zos ; yah urrais so mawi.

26 Yah usiddya mcrij^a so and alia

1

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
25 And eta he (ta mcnigeo ilt-ildi-af, he
code''' in, and nam hyrc hand ; and dxt
mseden aras.

[St. Matt.

26 And des hlisa sprang ofer eall da3t

yaina air))a.

land.t

27 Yah wharbondin lesua yainJ?ro, laist-
idcdun afar imma twai hlindans, hrop-
yandans, yah c[i)>andans, Armai uggkis,
sunau Daweidis.

28 Qimandin }>an in garda, duatiddye-
dun iinnia j^ai blindans ; yah (|aj) im
lesus, Gaulaubyats, ))atci niagyau pain
tauyan 1 Qe})un du imma, Yai, Frauya.

27 Da se HsGlend danun for, da fylig-
dun hym twcgyn l)linde, hrymynde, and
ewedende, La Dauidcs sunu, gemlltsa
unc.

28 Soj^lice da he ham com, da blindan
genealaehton to him ; and se Hsclend
cwa^jj to him, Gelyfe gyt, da't ic inc mseg
Hig cwaedon to him, Witod-
gehselan 1
lice, Drihten.

29 panuh attaitok augam ize, qi|)ands,

29 Da sethran he h}Ta eagcna, ewed-

Bi galaubciuai iggqarai wairj^ai iggqis.

ynde, Sy inc ajftyr incrun gclcafan.

30 Yah usluknodedim im aiigona. Yah
inagida ins Icsus, qijjands, Saiwhats, ei
manna ni witi.

30 And hyra eagan w?crun ontA'ncde.
And se Haelynd bebcad him, ewedende,
Warniaj), dait ge hyt nanum men ne
secgeon.

31 1}? CIS iisgaggandans, usmeridedun

3

Hig sojjlice utgangyndc, gewidmaer-

ina in allai air|)ai yainai.

sudun hyne ofer eall diet land.

32 panuh bi|5e ut iisiddyedim eis, sai !
atberun imma mannan baudana, daimon-
ari.

33 Yah bijjc usdribans war]? unhul})0,
Yah sildalcikidedun
rodida sa dumba.
managcins, qijnindans, Ni aiw swa us-
kiinj) was in Israela.

34 1}) Farcisaicis ([cjnin, In fauramaj^lya

unhulj)ono usdrcibij) uuhuljjons.

32 Dii hig wa?ron soj^lice ut-agane,
hig brohton him dumbne man, se wa'S
dcofol-seoc.

33 And ut-adryfcnum dam dcoflc, se
dumba spraec. And da mcnigeo wundre-
don, ewedende, Njsfre a3tywde swylc on
Israhcla folcc.

34 S6l>licc da Sundor-halgan cwaedon.

On dcoHa ealdre he drif}) lit dcoHu.

35 Yah bitauh Icsiis baurgs alios yah
haimos, laisyands in gaqunij)im ize, yah
mcryands aiwaggclyon })iudangardyos,
yah hailyands alios sauhtins, yah aUa
unliallya.

36 Gasaiwhands |>an j)OS managcins,
iiir<'inoda in ize ; nnte wesun afdauidai,
yah iVawaurpanai swe lamba ni haband-
ona hairdcis.

37 ])annh qa|) du siponyam scinaim,
Asans raihtis managa, i]> waurstwyans
fawai.

38 Bidyij) nu frauyan asanais, ci us-

sandyai waurstwyans in asan scina.

35 And so Hselcnd ymbfor callc ])urga
and ceastra, lan-cnde on hyra gesom-
nungum, and bodiende rices godspell,
adlc, and jclcc un-
and haelcnde aelce
trumncsse.

36 He gemiltsude s6}dicc da^rc mcnigeo,
fordan hig waMim
da he hi gcscah ;
gcdrchte, and licgendc swa swa sccap de
hyrde uabbaf>.
37 Da he Sccdc hys Icorning-cnihtun,
AVitodlicc miccl rip ys, and fcawa w}'rht-

yiia.

38 l^iddaj) da^s ripes hlaford, da?t he

seude wyrhtan to hys ripe.

;

IX. 25-38] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

43

25 And when the cumpanye w^as cast
out, he entride in, and held hir honde
and the wenche roose vp.

26 And this fame wente out in to al

the londe.
27 And Jhesu passynge thennes, twey
blynde men sueden hym, cryinge, and
sa}dnge, Thou sone
of Dauith, haue
mercy of vs.

28 Sothely when thei came home, the
blynde men camen ni^ to hym ; and
Jhesus saith to hem, What wole ^e, that
I do to 50U 1 And thei seiden, Lord, that
oure ee5en ben opnyd. And Jhesus saide,
Bileeue 5e, that I may do this thing to
50U ? And thei sayn, Sothely/ Lord.

29 Than he touchide her ee^en, say-

inge, Vp 5our feith be it don to 50U,

30 And the ee5en of bothe ben opnyde.
And Jhesus thretynyde to hem, sayinge,
See 3ee, that no man wite.

31 But thei goynge out, defameden

hym thorw^ al that lond.

32 Sothely thei gon out, loo !

thei
ofFriden to hym a man doumb, hauynge
a dcuel.
33 And whan the deuel was cast out,
the dounibe man spac.
And the cum-
panyes wondreden, sayinge, It aperede
neuere so in Yrael.

34 But the Pharisees saiden, In the

prince of deuelis he castith out deuelis.

35 And Jhesus compaside aboute alle
citces and castels, techynge in synagogis
of hem, and prechynge the gospel of
kyngdam, and helynge al languyshynge'*',
and al siknessc.

36 Forsothe Jhesus, siynge cumpanyes,
hadfle rcwthe of hem ;
for thei wcren
traufMlid, and liggyngc as sheep nut
hauynge a shoperde.

37 Thunnc he snide to his disciplis,
Sothely t/iere is moche rypc corne, but
fewe workmen.

3H Therfore prcyc 5c the lord of the
rijpc corn, that he scride workmen into
his rijp com.

25 As sone as the people wer put
forthe a dores, he went in, and toke her
by the bond ; and the mayde arose.

26 And this was noysed through out

all the londe.

27 And as Jesus departed thence, two
blynde men folowed hym, crying, and
sayng, O thou sonne of David, have
mercy on vs.

28 And when he was come into the
housse, the blyiid cam to hym ; and
Jesus sayde vnto them, Beleve ye, that
I am able to do thys 1 They sayde vnto
hyme, Ye, Master.

29 Then touched he their eyes, sayng,
Acordynge to youre faythe be it vnto
you.

30 And their eyes wer opened. And
he chaurged them, sayng, Se, that no
man knowe of it.

3 r But they as sone as they were de-
parted, spreed abroade hys name through
oute all the londe.

32 As they went out, beholde ! they
brought to hym a domne man, possessed
of a devyll.
33 And as sone as the devyll was cast
oute, the domne spake. And the people
merveled, saynge, It never soo appered
in Israhel.
3 4 Butt the Pharises sayde. He castcth
oute devyls by the power of the chefe
devyll.

35 And Jesus went about all the cites
and tonnes, teachynge in their sina-
goages, and preachyng the gospell off
the kyngdome, and healinge all maner
sicknes, and dcsease amonge the people.
36 But when he sawe the people, he
hadd pite on them ; because they were
pined awaye, and scattered abroade even
as shepc havynge no shcphecrd.
37 Then sayde he to hys disciples, The
hervest is greate, but the laborers ar
feawe.

38 Wherforc praye the harvest lordc, to
scnde forthe laljourers into hys harvest.

44

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

1

;

;

;

;

Chap. X.

Yah atbaitands |^ans

twalif si

Chap. X.

i And to somne p^ecigj'd-
um hys twelf leorning-cnihtun, he seal-
do him uncltenra <,'asta anweakl, diit hii^
adiyfon hig ut, and haeldun adle, aud
aelce untrumnysse.

2 Dis synt s6})lice djera twelf Apo-stola
namaii ; se fonua ys, Simon, de ys ge-
nemned Petnis, and Andreas, hys bro-
dor ; lacobus Zebedei, and lohannes,
hys br5dur

3 Philippus, and Bartholomeus ; Thom-
as, and Matheus Publieanus ; aud lac-
obus Alphei, and Taddeus

4 Simon Chananeiis, and ludas Sca-

rioth, de hyne belaewdc.

5 Das twelf se Haeljiid sonde, him
bebeodcndo, and cwedende, No fare ge
on jjooda weg, and ne ga ge innan Samar-
itana ceastre

6 Ac gaj) ma, to dam sceapum de for-

wurdun Israela hiw-rscdene.

7 Se Haeleud cwaej) to hys leorning-
cnihtun, Gajj and bodia]), cwedende, d^t
heofona rice geneala?c))

8 Hselaj) untrume, awecceaj) deade,
clipnsia)) hreoflo, dnfa|) ut deoflu ; ge
onfengun to-gyfe, sylla}) to-g}'fe.

9 Najbbe ge gold, ne seolfer, ne feoh

on eo^^Tum bigyrdlum,

10 Ne codd on wego, ne twa tunocan,
s6j)lice se wyrhta

ne gescy, ne gyrde ;
ys wyrde hys metys.

1

On swa hwj'lce burh, odde cea.stre,
swa ge ingaj), ahsiaj> hwa si w}rde on
dsere, and wunia}) dier, od ge ut-gan.

1 2 Donne ge ingan s6))lice on da?t hiis,
grcta}) hit, cwedende, Sy syb disum hiiso.
13 And gyf da^t Inis witodlice wyrde
bi}>, cower syb cyme|) ofer liyt ; gyf hyt
s6}>Hce \\yrdc ne byj>, eowur syb byj> to
cow gecyrred.

14 And swa hwa swa eow ne under-
feh)^ ne eowre spricca ne gehyrj), doiinc
ge lit-gan of dam huso, odde of da-re
ccjvstere, asceaca)> da^t dust of eowinin
fotum.

15 Soj'lice ic cow sccge, acumciuliicre

2

;

;

;

3
1

;

;

;

;

X. I-I5.] WYCLTFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

45

Chap. X.

i And the twelue disciplis
clepid to gidre, he 3aue to hem power of
vnclene spiritis, that thei shulde casten
hem out, and that thei shulden heele al
ache, and al siknesse.

2 These ben the names of twelue apo-
stelis ; the first, Symoun, that is clepid
Petre, and Andrew, his brother ;

Chap. X.

i And he called his xij
disciples vnto him, and gave them power
over all vnclene sprites, to cast them
oute, and to heale all maner of sick-
nesses, and all maner off deseases.

2 The names of the xij apostles are
these ; the ^'i^st, Simon, which ys called
Peter, and Andrew, his brother

3

Philip, and Bartilmew ; Jamys of
Zebedee, and Joon, his brother ; Tho-
mas, and Matheu puplican ; and James
Alphei, and Thadee

3 James the sonne off Zebede, and
Philip, and Bartle-
Jhon, his brother ;
mew ; Thomas, and j\Iathew the publican
James the sonne off Alphe, and Lebbeus,
otherwyse called Taddeus

4 Symount Canane, and Judas Scarioth,

4 Simon off Cane, and Judas Iscarioth,

the whiche betraiede Crist.

which also betrayed hym.

5 Jhesus sente these twelue, comaund-
yn^e to hem, and sayinge, Goth 56 nat
into the wey of heithen men, and entre
5e nat in to the citees of Samarietanys

5 These xij

sent Jesus, and com-
maunded them, saynge, Goo nott into
the wayes thatt leade to the gentyls, and
into the cites off the Samaritans enter
ye nott

6 But rather goth to the sheep of the

6 But go rather to the lost shepe off

hous of Yrael, that i^erishiden.

the housse of Israhel.

7 Sothely 3ee goynge preche, sayinge,

for the kyngdam of heuenes shal nei3e ;

7 Go and i)reach, sayng, that the kyng-

dome off heven ys at hande ;

8 Hele ^e seke men, vpreyse ^ee dead
men. clense 3e meselis, cast 3e out deuelis ;
frely 36 han taken, frely 3eue 3e.

9 Nyl 36 welden gold, nether syluer,

8 Heale the sicke, dense the lepers,
rayse the deed, caste oute the devils ;
frely ye have receved, frely geve agayue.
9 Posses nott golde, nor silver, nor

ne money in 30ure girdlis,

10 Not a scripe in the weye, nether
two cootis, nether shoon, nether 3eerd ;
for a workman is worthi his mete.

IT In to whateuer citee, or castel, 30
shulen entre, axeth who therinne
is
worthi, and there dwclle ^e, til that 50
gon out.

1

Forsothe 36 entrynge in to an house,

brasse yn youre gerdels,

10 Nor yet scrip towardes your iorney,
nether two cotes, nether shues, nor yet
a rod ; for the workman is worthy to
have his meate.

1

Into whatsoever cite, or toune, ye
shall com, enquyre who ys worthy yu it,
and there abyde, till ye goo thence.

12 And when ye come into an housse,

grete 30^ it, sayinge. Pees to this hous.

grete the same.

13 And sothely 3if that ilk hous be

worthi, 30ure pees shal cumc on it
forsothe 3if that house be nat worthy,
30ure pees shall turne a3ein to 30U.

14 And who euere shall nat resceyuo
30U. nether hoor 3oure wordis, 3('e goynge
forth fro that hou.s,^ smytith awey the
dust fro 3ourc feet.

1

And yff the housse be worthy, youre
peace shall come apon the same ; but yf
it be not worthy, youre peace shall re-
tourne to you agayne.

14 And whosoever shall nott rccrave
lieare youre pi-eiichyiigc,
you, nor will
when ye departe oute off that hoiisse, or
that cite, shake of the duste of youre

15 Trewly I say to 30U, it shall be

15 Trudy r say vnto you, it sliulbc

fete.

;

46

GOTUIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. :NrATT.

by|j Sodoma landc and Gomorra on
domes daeg, donne da^re ceastre.^

16 Nu! ic eowsende swa sceap gemang
wulfas ; beoj) eornustlice glcawe swa naid-
dran, and ])ilwyte swa culfran.

17 AVainiaj) eow s6j)lice fram mannum,
big sylta}? eow sojjHce on gemotum, and
swingaj) eow on byra gesonmungum ;

18 And go beoj) gelaedde to demum,
and to cynyngum for me, to byra dome,
and })eodun.

19 Donne belaewaj) big and^ syllaj) cow,
ne JK'nce ge, bu odde bwict ge sprecun,
eow byj) geseald s6j)lice on divre tide,
bwiet ge sprecun ;

20 Ne synt ge na de da3r sprecaj), ac

eowres fa^der gast, de spryc}> on eow.

21 S6j)lice brodur syl)> bys brodur to
dcajjc, and fseder bys sunu, and beain
arisajj ongcn magas, and to dcaj^e
bi
fordojj.

22 And ge beo|> on batunge callum
mannum, for minura naman ; s6|>lice se
})urbwuna|) od ende, se h\\> bal.

23 Donne bi eow elitaj^ on dysse b^Tig,
fleoj) on odre ; and donne bi on daM*e
eow ebtaj), fleoJ? on da |iryddan.
86|ilice
ic eow secge, ne befaraj) ge Isiabela
burga, serdan de manues sunu .cume.

23

jn'zai baurg, |jliuhai|) in
Anu'n auk (ii))a izwis, oi ni us-
sa

anjinra.
tiuliij) baurgs Israelis, uute qimij)
sunus mans.

24 Nist

siponcis

iifar laisarya,

nili

24 Nys se leorning-cnilit ofer bys la-

skulks ufar frauyin seinamnia

reow, ne J^eow ofer bys blaford ;

25 Oanali siponi, ci wairjjai swe laisar-
eis IS, yali skalks swc friUiya is.
Yabai
^anlawaldand l^aiailzaibul liailiaitiin, und
Mliau iilu niais j^uus iunakuuduns is 1

26 Ni niinu oi^ci|> i'zwis ins ; ni waiht
auk ist i,'aliuli|>, |)att'i ni andlmlyaidau ;
y:d» ful^^'in, J'atci ni ufkunnaiilau.

27 patci <|i|ia i/.wis in ri(|iza, (|i|Mii|> Tn
liuliada ; yah |)atoi in auso gahausei|>,
nu'ryai|i ana lirutani.

25 Genob by|> B6}>lice dam leorning-
cnibte, diet be sy swylce liys bireow, and
Gyf bi d;v3
j)cow swylce bys blaford.
bircdes feeder Belzebub cl}i)edun, mycle
swydur big eow clyjiiaj) ?

26 Eornustlice ne ondrrcde ge big ;*
nys so|>li('o niin {^ing dybU-, da^t ne wurde
goswiitelod ; ne nan dible j'ing, da>t ne
wurde geopenod.

27 Da't ic eow sccge on |)ystrum, scc-
ga|> byt on Icobte ; and da^t ge on care
gcbyraj), bodiaj? uppan brofum.

28 \i\\\ ni ()g<ij) izwis jums us(jiniand-

28 And nc ondraiHle ge da de eowyrne

7

;

9
6

;

;

X. 1 6-28.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

47

more siiffreable to the lond of men of
Sodom and Gomor in the day of iuge-
ment, than to that citee.

16 Loo !

T sende 50U as sheep in to
the mydil of wolues ; therfore be ^e war^
as serpentis, and symple as dowues.

1

Forsothe be ^e war of men, for thei
shuln taken 50U in counseilis, and thei
shuln bete 50U in there synagogis ;

18 And to presidentis/ and to kjiigis
56 shulen be led for me, in to witness-
ynge to hem, and hethen men.

19 But whenne thei shulen take"*" 50U,
nyl 56 thenke, how or what thing 5ee
speeken, forsothe it shal be 5ouen to 50U
in that hour, what 3e shuln speke ;

20 For it ben nat ^e that speken, but
the spirit of 50ure fadir, that spekith in
50U.

21 Sothely the brother shal take the
brother in to deth, and the fadir the
sone, and the sonys shulen ryse a^eins
fadir and modir, and shulen tom'mente
hem bi deth.

22 And 5e shulen be in hate to alle
men, for my name ; forsothe he that
shall dwelle stille in to the eende, this
shal be saaf.

23 Sothely whenne thei shulen pursue
;ou in this citee, flee ^e in to an other.
Trewly I saye to 50U, ^e shulen nat
eende the citees of Yrael, til that mannes
sone cume.

24 The disciple is nat aboue the maistre,

ne the seruaunt aboue his lord

25 It is ynow to the disciple, that he
be as his maistre, and to the seruaunt
3^^ thei han clepid the
as his lord.
huslionde man^ Belzebul), hou myche
more his housholde meynee ]

26 Tlierfore drede ^e nat liem ; for no
thing is couerid,^ that shal nat be shewid;
and no thing is prcuy, that shal nat Ijc
wist.

27 That thing that Y say to ym in
dercncssis, suyc 5ee in the li5t; and
preche 30 vpon housis, that thing tliat
jee hcerc in ere.

28 And uyl 30 drecdc licm that slcen

I

easier for the londe off Zodoma and Go-
mora in the daye off iudgement, then for
that cite.
Lo !

I sende you forthe as shepe
amonge wolves ; be ye therfore wyse as
serpentes, and innocent as doves.

1

17 Beware off men, fFor they shall de-
liver you vp to the counseils, and shall
scourge you in there sinagogges

18 And ye shall be brought to the heed
ruelers, and kynges for my sake, in wit-
nes to them, and to the gentyls.

1

But when they put you vp, take no
thought, howe or what ye shall speake,
for yt shall be geven you even in that
same houre, what ye shall saye

20 For it is not ye that speke, but the
sprete of your father, which speaketh in
you.

21 The brother shall betraye the bro-
ther to deeth, and the father the sonne,
and the chyldren shall aryse agynste
their fathers and mothers, and shall put
them to deethe.

22 And ye shall be hated off all men,
ffor my name ; but whosoever shall con-
tinew vnto the ende, shalbe saved.

23 When they persecute you in wone
I tell you for a
cite, flye in to another.
treuth, ye shal nott fynysshe all the cites
of Israhel, tyll the sonne of man be
come.

24 The disciple ys nott above hys
master, nor yet the servaunt above his
lorde ;

25 It is ynough for the disciple, to be
as hys master ys, and that the servaunt
be as his lorde ys. Yf they have called
the lorde off the housse Beelzebub, howe
moche more shall they call them of his
houscholde so ]

26 Feare them nott therefore ; there
is no thinge so close, that shall not be
ojX'iincd ; and no thinge so hyd, that
shall not be knowen.

27 What I tell you in dercknos, that
8j)eake ye in lyght ; and what ye hcare
in the earc, that preache ye on the
housse toppcH,

28 And feare ye nott them which kyll

48

OOTITIC, 360.

ij) saiwalai ni mag-
ans leika )mtaiiR'i ;
'\\> o^eij) mais |>ana
nndans usqiman ;
niagaiKlan yali saiwalai yah leika ft'afjist-
yan in gaiainnan.

29 Niu twai sparwans assanaii hu^r-
fjadriusij? ana

yanda 1 yah ains ize ni
air})a inuh attins izwaris wilyan.

30 Ajij^an izwara yah tagla haubidis

alia gara|>ana sind.

31 Ni nunii ogei|7 ; manngaim sparwam

batizans siyiij) yus.

32 Sawhazuh nil saei andhaiti}> mis in
andwair|)ya nianne, andhaita yah ik ini-
nia in and\vair))ya attins mcinis saci in
himinam ist.

3.3

'I' I'iswhanoh saoi afaiki}> mik in
andwair}iya manne, afaika yah ik ina in
andwair}>ya attins meinis j)is saei in hinni-
inam "ist,

34 Nih ahyai|i, ))atei qcmyau lagyan
ga\vair}>i ana air|)a ; ni qam lagyan ga-
-vvairl)!, ak hairu.

35 Qsmi auk skaidan mannan wi|)ra
attan is, yah dauhtar wi|)ra ai|)ein izos,
yah bruj' wil'ra swaihron izos ;

1

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

lichaman ofsleaj) ; ne magon hig sof'lice
rta sawle ofslean ; ac ondraeda)? ma done,
(te maeg sawle and lichaman fordon on
helle.

29 Hu ne becypa)? hig twegen spear-
wan to peninge 1 and an of rtam ne be-
fyl}> on eorjjan biitan eowrun faider.

30 And sc|)lice

ealle eowres heafdes

loccas syut getealde.

3

Ne ondrsede ge ; ge synt sclran

clonne manega spearwan."*"

32 ^'Icne eornustlice de me cy}? be-
rffte hyne beforan

foran mannum, ic
miuum faider de on heofonum ys.

33 Se dc me wids3ec|) beforan mannum,
and ic widsace hyne beforan minum feeder
de on heofenum ys.

34 Ne wene ge, dajt ic come sybbe on
eor})an to sendanne ; ne com ic sybbe
to sendanne, ac swurd.

35 Ic com s6[>lice mann asyndrian
ongen hys faider, and dohtur ongen hyre
modur, and snore ongen hyre swegre ;

36 Yah fiyands mans innakundai is.

36 And mannes iynd hys gehiisan.^

37 Saei friyoji attan ai|)|'au ai{'oin nfar
niik, nist meina wair|)S. Yah saei friyo|>
sunn aij'pau dauhtar ufar mik, nist meina

"wairjjs.

38 Yah saei ni nimi}> galgan seinana,
yah laistyai afar mis, nist meina wairj^s.
39 Saei bigiti{) saiwala seina, fra(jistei|)
I'zai ; yah saei fracjisteij) saiwalai seinai
in meina, bigitij' I'D.

40 Sa andnitnands Vzwis, mik nndnim-
; yah sa mik aiidnimaiids, andnim-

i)>

i|) {'ana sandyandan mik.

4 I Sa audiiimauds praulVtu in namin
])raufetaus, mizdon praufetis nimi|\ "^ ah
8a andnimands garaihtana "in namin ga-
raihtis, mizdon garaihtis nimi|).

37 Se Heelend cw.t]' to hys leorning-
enihtum, Se de lufa}> fitder odde mudor
ma donne me, nys he me wyrde.
And
se de lufaj) sunu odde dohtor s^vydur
donne me, nys he me wyrde.

38 And se de ne nimj) hys cwjdminge,

and fyligl' me, nys he me w}Tde.

39 Se de gemet hys sawle. se forspil|i
hig; and se de fors])il}> hys sawle for
me, he gemet hi.

40 Se de eow undcrfoh{\ he undorfoh[>
me ; and se de me underfeh}), he under-
feh}> done de me sende.

41 Se de und('rfeh|i witeofan on witopin
And
naman, he onfehl> witygan mede.
8c de underfeh |) rihtwisne on riht wises
naman, he onfeh}) rihtwises mede.

42 Yah saei gadragkei}> ainana |>ize
minnistane stikla kaldis watius |>atainei
Yn namin siponcis, amen (pjui izwis, ci
ni fra<pstei|) mizdon seinai.

42 And swa hw}-lc swa syl|> annc drinc
cealdes w.Tteres anum dyssa lytylra man-
na on leorning-cnihtes naman, so]'
ic
secgc eow, ne am^TJ) he hys mede.

1

^

1
1

X. 29-42.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

49

the body ; trewly thei mowen nat slea
the soule ; bot rather dreede 56 hym,
Hhat may lese soule and body in to helle.

29 Whether twey sparwis ben not sold
for an halpeny 1 and oon of hem shal nat
falle on the erthe withouten ^oure fadir.
30 Forsothe alle the heeris of 5om'e

heued be noumbrid.

the body ; and be nott able to kyll the
soule ; but rather feare him, which is
able to destroye bothe soule and body
in hell.

29 Are nott two sparowes solde for a
farthinge 1 and none of them dothe lyght
on the grounde with out youre father.

30 And nowe are all the heeres of

youre heedes numbred.

3

Therfore nyle ^e drede ;

better than many sparwis.

50 ben

3 2 Therfore euery man that shal know-
leche me before men, and I shal know-
leche hym byfore my fadir that is in
heuenes.

33 Sothely lie that shal denye me
bifore men, and I shall denize hym be-
fore my fadir whiche is in heuenes.

34 Nyl 5ee deme, that I cam to sende
pees in to erthe ; I cam not to sende
pees in to erthe, but swerd.
35 Sothely Y cam to departe a man
a^eins his fadir, and the dou5ter a^einys
hire modir, and the sonys ^\yf a5eins the
wyues, or husbondis, modir ;

36 And the enmyes of a man hen his

homly meynee.
37 He that loueth fadir or modir more
than me, is nat worthi of me. And he
that loueth sone or dou3ter ouer me, is
nat worthi 0/ me.

38 And he that takith nat his crosse,

and sueth me, is not worthi qfmc.
39 He that fyndith his soule ^, shal
Icesc it; and he that lesitli his soule
for me, shal fynde it.

40 He that resscyueth 50U, resceyueth
me ; and he that resceyueth me, re-
sceyueth hym that sente me.

41 And he that resceyueth a prophetc
in the name of a prophete, shal take the
And he that rc-
medc of a prophete.
sceyuetli a iust man in the name of a
iust man, shal take the mecde of a iust
man.

42 And who ouer 5iueth drynke to oon
of these lestc a cuppe of cold water
oonly in the name of a disci})l(', trewly I
Buyc to 30U, he shul nut Icese h'lH mcde.

3

Feare ye not therfore ; ye are off

more value then many sparrowes.
32 Who soever therfore knowlegeth
me before men, him will I knowledge
before my father in heven.

33 But whosoever shall denye me be-
fore men, hira will I also denye before
my father which ys in heven.

34 Thynke not, that Y am come to
sende peace in to the erth ; I cam nott
to send peace, but a swearde.
35 For Y am come to sett a man att
varyaunce ageynst hys father, and the
doughter ageynst her mother, and the
doughterelawe ageinst her motherelawe ;
36 And a mannes fooes shalbe they

of his owne housholde.
37 He that lovith hys father or mother
more then me, is not worthy of me.
And he that loveth his sonne or doughter
more then me, is not mete for me.

38 And he that taketh nott his crosse,

and foloweth me, ys nott mete for me.
39 He that fyndeth his lyfe, shall lose
it ; and he that losith hys lyfe for my
sake, shall fynde it.

40 He that receavith you, receavith
me ; and he that receavith me, receavith
him that sent me.

4

He that receavith a prophet in the
name of a prophet, sliall reccave a i)ro-
And lie that receavith
phetes rewarde.
a righteous man in the name of a righ-
teous man, shall receave the reward of a
rigliteous man.
42 And wliosocvcr shall geve vnto won
of tljose lytic wonnes to drinkc a cuppe
of colde water only in the name of a dis-
ciple, I tcl you of a tructh, he shall not
lose his rewarde.

E

]

1

r>o

GOTHIC, 360.

Chap. XI.

i Yah war|), bij'c iisful-
lidii icsus, aiuibiudanJs )?aiiii twalif sip-
oiiyam seinaiin, ushof sik yaiiijn-o du
laisyua yah nieryan aud baurgs ize.

2 i\> fohannes f,mhausyands in karkarai
waurstwa Christaus, iiisandyands bi sip-
onyani seinaiin,

3 Qa{> du nnnia, |Hi is sa qiraanda, })au

anjarizuli beidaima

4 Yah andliafyands Tesus, qaji du im,
Ga^'gan(Uins gateihi|> lohaune Jjatei ga-
hausei|5 yah gasaiwlii}?.

5 iniiuhii ussaiwliaiid, yah haltai gagg-
and, |>rutsfillai hrainyai wairjmnd, yah
b:;udai gahausyand, yah dau|>ai urreis-
aml, yali unledai waihinieryanda.

6 Yah audags ist whazuh, saei ni ga-

marzyada in mis.

7 At Jniim |)an afLTnggandam, dugann
Icsus (|i|nin ))aiin managcini bi luhaiincn,
Wha u.siddycdu|) ana au))ida saiwhan 1
raus frani wiiida wagidata ]

aii

8 Akci wha us'iddycduj? saiwhan 1 inann-
gawasidana 1
|)aici linasqyaiui wasidai sind in

lnias(|yaiin

wastyoin

Sai !
gardini ])iudane sind.

9 Akei wha usiddycduj) saiwhan? prauf-
izwis, yah managizo

Yai,

(|ij)a

(tu ?

praufV'tau.

10 8a ist auk, bi ))anci gamelij) 1st,
Sai ! ik insandya aggihi nicinaua^ faura
}>us, saci ganiauweij? wig |)cinaiia faura

f>us.

I I Amen qijm Vzwis, ni urrais in baur-
im (jiiiono maiza lohanne jjamma Daup-
yaudin ;
i|> sa minniza in |)iudangardyai
liimine, maiza imma ist.

13 Framuh jmn jmim dagam loljannis
|>is l)auj)yandins und liita |)iu(hmganli
himine anamahtyaihi, yah anamalityand-
ans fin wi I wand |-o.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

Chap. XI. i And liyt wnes gewordeii,
eta se Hcclyud dys ge-eududc, hys twelf
Icorning-cnihtum bebcodende, he for
claiiun diet he laerde and bodude on hyra
burgum.^

2 Da lohannes on bendum gehyrde
Cristes weoruc, da sende he to him
twegen hys leorning-cnihta,
3 And (Twie)?, Eart dii de to cumenne
eait, odde we odres sceolon abidan ]

4 Se Haelcnd antswarude, and cwa?))
to him, Ga[) and cyda}) lohanne da ]>ing
de ge gehyrdon and gesawon.

5 Bliiide

geseoj), hcalte

ga[>, hreofe
synt aclsensude, deafe gehyra}), deade
arisaj), j?earfan bodiaj?.

6 And eadig ys, se de ne swica]? on me.

7 Da hi ut-codon, soj'lice da ongan se
Ilcclynd sccgan be lohanne, aud cw;e})
to da3re menigeo, Hwi eode ge lit on
wusten^ geseon] winde awegyd hreod ?

8 Odde hwi eode ge ut geseon ] maim
hneseum gyrlum gescrydne 1 Nu ! da
de s}iit hnescum gyrlum gescrydde synt
on cyninga hiisum.

9 Ac hwret eode ge ut witegan gcscon 1
Ic cow secgc, cac maran doune witegan.

10 Des ys s6j>licc, be dam awryten ys.
Nil ! ic sende miune cni;yl befdran dine
ansyne, se gegearwa}) diuue weg befdran
de.

1

S6|>lice ic cow secge, ne aras be-
twyx >vifa bearnum mara lohanne Ful-
sd|)liee se de hessa ys, ys on
wihtere ;
heofi'iia lice him mara.

12 Si)|>liee tVam lohannes dagum Ful-
wihteres od dis lieofena rice )>ohij) iiead,
and strece nimaj> diet.

13 Allai auk praufetcis yah wito)> und

13 S6[)licc calle witegan and ir witeg-

lohanne fauia<|e| un.

udun od lohannes.

14 Yah yabai wildedeij) mi|>niman, sa

14 And gyf ge wylla)) gelyfan, he ys

ist llelias saei skulihi «iiinan.

Helias de to cumeiine vs.

If) 8uci lud>ai au[.sona^ hausyandoua,

15 So de caran ha'bbe to gehyrynne,

ga]hausya[i].

geliyre.

1

4
3
1

XI. I-I5.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

51

Chap. XI.

i And it is don, when
Jhesus hadde eendid, lie, comaundynge
to his twelue disciplis, passide fro thennes
for to preche and teche in the citees of
hem.

2 Forsothe when Joon in boondis hadde
herd the werkis of Crist, he, sendynge
two or three of his disciphs,

3 Seide to hym, Art thou he that art

to cummynge, or we abiden an other 1

4 And Jhesus answerynge, seide to hem,
3ee goynge telle a^ein to Joon the thingis
that 5e han herde and seen.

5 Blynde men seen, crokid men wan-
dren, mesels ben maad clene, deef men
heeren, dead men risen a3ein, pore men
ben taken to prechynge of the gospel.^

6 And he is blessid, that shal nat be

sclaundrid in me;

7 Sothely hem goynge awey, Jhesus
biganne for to seye of Joon to the cum-
panyes. What thing wenten 5e out for
to see in desert 1 whether a reede wawid
with wynd 1

8 But what thing wente ^e out for to
seen 1 whether a man elothid with soft
thei that ben elothid
thingis ]
with softe thingis ben in housis of
kyngis.

Loo !

9 But what thing wenten ^e out for to
^e, 1 seie to

se 1 whether a prophete '?
50U, and more than a prophete.

10 For this is he, of whom it is writyn.
I sende myne aungel before thi
Loo !
face, that shal make redy thi wey bifore
thee.

1

Trewly I say to 50U, ther roose
noon more than Joon Baptist amonge
children of wommen ; forsothe he that
is lesse in the kyngdam of hcuenes, is
more than he.

I 2 Sothely fro the days of Joon Baptist
til now tlie kyngdam of hcuenes suflVeth
strengthe,^ and violent men rauysheu it.

Chap. XI.

i And it cam to passe,
when Jesus had ended his preceptes vnto
disciples, he departed thence to
his
preache and teache in there cites.

2 When Jhon beinge in preson herde
the workes of Christ, he sent two of his
disciples,
3 And sayde vnto him. Arte thou he
that shall come, or shall we loke for
another 1

4 Jesus answered, and sayde vnto them,
Go and shewe Jhon what ye have herde
and sene.

5 The blind se, the halt goo, the lyp-
pers ar clensed, the deef heare, the ded
are reysed vp ageine, and the gospell is
preachede to the povre.

6 And happy is he, thatt is noott hurte

by me.

7 Even as they departed, Jesus began
to speake vnto the people of Jhon, What
went ye for to se in the wyldernes ]
went ye out to se a rede waveringe with
the wynde 1

8 Oder what went ye out for to se ?
went ye to se a man clothed in soofte
rayment ?
Beholde ! they that weare
soofte clothing are in kynges bowses.

9 Butt what went ye oute for to se ]
went ye outt to se a prophet 1
Ye, I
saye vnto you, and more then a prophet.
10 For this is he, off whom it is wryt-
I sende my messenger
ten, Beholde !
before thy face, which shall prepare thy
waye before the.

Verely Y saye vnto you, amonge
the chyldren off women arose there not
a gretter then Jhon Baptist ; not with
stondinge he that ys lesse in the kyng-
dom ofl' heven, ys gretter tlien he.

1

12 From the tynie off Jhon Baptist
hytherto the kyngdom of heven suflreth
violence, and they that make vyolenco
pull it vnto them.

13 For allc prophetis and tlie huve til

For all the prophetcs and the lawe

1

Joon Baptist propliecieden ;

14 And ^if 30 wolcn resscyucn, he is

prophesyed vnto to tyme of Jhon ;

Also yf ye wyll rcccavc it, thys ys

1

Ely that is to cinne.

15 He that huth ccris of hccrynge,
hcerc he.

Ilelyas which shuld come.

15 He that hath cares to heare, let him

here.

K 2

ji:

OOTIIIC, 360.

16 [We nu «,Mlri4co] }>ata ku[iii ] rialcik
ist l)urii!un] sitandam [111 pirmisai, yah
wo|)yan]ilain anjmr uiij a[ri8,

yiili

(ji))-

unjclain,

17 S\vi;,'l<>(UHlum izw[i.s, yali] 111 ])linsid-

eilu)> ; l»ut[uin, yah] ni qaiuutlt'tlu}>.

[St. Matt.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
16 S(')))llce hwam telle ic das cneorysse
Ileo ys gelic sittenduni cnaj»un
geliec 1
on foretige, da hrynia|> to hyra efengclic-
011, and cwectajj,

17 We sunj^m eow, and ge ne frlcud-

un ; we cwiddun, and ge ne weopun.

i^ Qain raihtis to]ian[iH'S nih inat]-
yiiiids nili dri!4kan[«ls, yah 4i]|)aiRl, Un-
hul|>[on lial)ui|)].

H) \():\u\] sa sunns man[s niatyands
yah] (h-i^kands, y[ah (ji|'and, Sai ! nuui]-
na afetya, yah af[(h'nL,']kya, [niojtarye
Yah us-
friyonds yali frawanrhtaizc.
waurhta ;^a(h>niida war}) handugci fram
barnani soinaini.

20 panuh duj^ann idw(.'itya[n] baurg-
in», in |)ainici waur|)nn |)()s n>anaLxist«ins
mahtt'is is, [[atci ui idrcigodtdunj sik.

18 S'.'|)lice lohannes com ne etendc ne
drinccndc, and hi cwadun, He ha?f|>
deoful-seocnysse.

19 Mannes sunn com otende and drync-
endc, and hi cweda}>, Her ys ettul-inan,
and win-drincende, manfulra and syii-
And wisdom ys geriht-
fuh-a freond.
wisud fram heora bearuum.^

20 Da ongan he hyspan da burga, on
dam WiiTun gedone nianega hys mtegeua,
fonlam de hi ne dydoii dicd-bute.

21 [Wai |>ns ! Kanmzein, wai |>]nsl I?c|>-
[Haidan ; unto i|> wajurjieina [in Tyre yali
St'idon]e hmda niah[tois |>os waur]|>anon8
'in i/wls, fairis |)]au in sakkau yah azgou
[idrri;,']«Kh'drina.

2 2 Swcliauli qi[|)a Tzwis], Tyrim yali
Sciilonini [sntizo wa]irj)i|> in daga stau-
[<>s, I'au izwijs.

23 Yah l^u, Ka»farna[nni, jni und hijinin
nshanliida, [<lahi)> und haly]a j^aloi|'is.
Unte yai)ai in S]auilauniyani [>vau]r}>e-
ina mjahtcis, [)oa \vanr|ianons in izwis,
ai|>))au cis wcsrina und hina dag.

24 Swe|)auh <ii)>a izwis,

air}>ai
Sauilauniyesutizo wairl^i}) in daga stauos,
)ian |>us.

jmtci

2.^ hiuh vainanima mcla andliaf-

21 Wjidel Corozaim.wadel P>othsai<la;
fordani gyf on Tyro and Sydone wa^ruu
gedone da ma'gnu de gedone syni on
eow, gefym hi dyduu djed-bote on hscran
and on axau.

2 2 Dcali ic secge inc, T}to and Sydone
bv}> forgyfendlicur on domes da»g, dounc
eow.

23 And dii, Capharnaum, cwyst du byst
dii up-ilhafcn od hoofen ? Ac dii nidcr-
fa?rst od helle. Fordani gyf on Sodumum
waM'on gedone da ma^gnu, de gedone
synt on de, witodlice hi wunedun od
dysnc dn?g.

24 Deah hwaMlere ic secge eow, da^t
Sodom-wara lande byj) forgyfenlicre on
dttint'>< d;« _'. d<»nin' do.^

J.-, Sr llalyiid c\\;i'|» aiidswariendc. Ic
andyttc dc, drihten heofcnes and eorjmn,
dii de bchyddyst dils {"ing fn»m wisum
and gleuwum, and onwruge da lytling-
uni ;

26 Swii, fabler, fordam hyt wa^s swii

gccweme befonin de.

27 Ealle |»ing me synt gesealde fram
niinuni fanlyr, and n:in man ne c^ui done
fatlyr, ne nan mann. no
sunu, biitun
can done faHl>T, biilun sunu, and dam
de sc sunu wyle onwreon.

r" ''

gi'-.

'

*

,

' me. ealle de sn\
i, and ic cow gi

and

1

1

XL 16-28.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

16 But to whom shal I gesse this
generacioun lichy 1
It is lidii to chil-
dren sittynge iu cheepynge, the whiche,
cryinge to her peeris, seien,
17 We han sungen to 50U, and 56 han
nat lippid ; we han mourned to 30U,
and 5e han nat weilid.

18 Sothely Joon cam neither etyinge
ne drynkynge, and thei seien, He hath
"a deueL

19 The sone of man came etynge and
drynkynge, and thei seyen, Loo ! a man
deuourer,''' and di^ynker of wyn, and
frend of puplicanys and synful men.
And wijsdam is iustified of her sonys.

20 Thanne Jhesus began for to seie
repreue to citees, in whiche ful manye
vertues of hym ben don, for thei diden
nat peuaunce.

2

Woo to thee ! Corozaym, woo to
Bethsaida ; for ^if tho vertues
thee !
that ben don in 50U hadden ben don in
TjTe and Sydon, sum tyme thei hadden
don penaunce in haire and asch.

22 Netheies I say, it shal be softer * to
Tyre and Sydon than to 30U, in the day
of dome.

23 And thou, Caphernaum, whether
til in to heuen thou shalt be rerid vp ]
Thou shalt go doun til into helle.
For
5if the vertues that ben don in thee,
hadden be don in Sodom, perauenture thei
shulden han dwellid til vn to this day.

24 Netheies Y saye to 30U, for to the
lond of Sodom it shal be softer^ in the
day of dome, than to thee.

25 In the ilk tyme Jhesus answerynge
saide, I knowlcche to thee, fadir, lord of
heuen and erthe, for thou hast hid these
thingis fro wijse men and ware,^ and
hast shewid hem to litil men ;

26 So, fadir, for whi so it was plcsyngc

tofore thee.

27 Alle thingis ben taken to mc of my
fadir ; and no man kncwe tho sone, no
but the fadir, neither cny man knewc
the fadir, no but the sone, and to whom
the sone woldc shewc.

28 Alle 30 that traueilon, and })cn
chargid, come to mc, and I shal refreshed
^ou.

i

TYNDALE, 1526.

53
16 But wheare vnto shall Y lyken this
generacion 1
It ys lyke vnto chyldren
which syt in the markett, and call vnto
there felowes, and saye,

17 We have pyped vnto you, and ye
have not daunsed ; we have morned vnto
you, and ye have not sorowd.

18 For Jhon cam nether eatynge nor
drinkinge, and they saye, He hath the
devyll.

19 The Sonne of man cam eatynge and
drinkynge, and they saye, Beholde ! a
glutton, and a drynker of wyne, and a
frend vnto publicans and synners. And
wysdome ys iustified off her chyldren.

20 Then began he to vpbraid the cites,
in which most of his miracles were don,
because they did not repent.

2

Wo be to the ! Chorasin, wo be to
the ! Betzaida ; for if the miracles which
wer shewd in you had bene done in Tiyre
and Sidon, they had repented longe agon
in sack cloth and asshes.
22 Neverthelesse Y say to you, it shall
be esier for Tyre and Sidon at the day
of iudgment, then for you.

23 And thou, Capernaum, which art
lift vp vnto heven, shalt be thrust doune
to hell. Ffor if the miracles which have
bene done in the, had bene shewed in
Zodom, they had remayned to this daye.

24 Neverthelcsse I say vnto you, it
shall be easiar for Zodom in the day of
iudgement, then for the.

25 Then Jesus answered and sayd, I
prayse the, o father, lorde of heven and
erth, because thou hast hid these thyngcs
from the wyse and prudent, and hast
opened them vnto babes ;

26 Even so, father, for so it pleased

the.

27 All thyngcs arc gcven vnto mc of
my father; and no man knowcth the
Sonne, but tho father, nether knowcth
eny man the father, save the sonno, ajid
he to whomc the sonne will open liyni.

28 Come vnto mc, all yc tliiit labour,

and ar laden, and Y will cse you.

54

GOTHIC, 360.

2
1

I

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

29 Nima|) min ffcoc ofer cow, and leorn-
ia|> irt me, furttain ic com bilwite aiul
eadmod on bcortan ; and ge gemtta))
resto oowrum sawliim.

30 8(*)|'lice min fjeoc ys w}Tisum, and
min b)T(1}Ti ys leoht.

Chat. Xll/ i Se Hjvlynd for on r<-^' -
dn\i;c ofvr a?C}Tas ; 86|>licc hys leorn n^-
hingrydc, and hig ongunnun
enihtas
pluccian da ear, and etan.

2 S6})lice da da Sundor-hillj^n da?t
gesawon, hi cwaedon to liini, Nu ! dine
leorninLr-cnihtas do|) dat him alyfyd nys
rcste-da^^uin to donnc.
3 And he cwa?|> to hira, Ne ncdde go
hwa^t Dauid dyde, da li^Tie hingrede,
and da de mid hym wa'nui ?

4 Hil he ineode on Go«lcs lals, and a?t
da ofiVing-hhifas, de nscnm liim alyfede
to ctynne, nc dam do mid him wwinin,
butnn dam sacerdum anum I

5 Odde ne radde gc on da^e », dirt
da sacerdaa on reste-dagiim on dam
temple go\vcmma}> done rcstc-da^g, and
synt butan kahtre ?

6 Ic Bcege 86|>bce cow, daet des

vs

1

marra donno da't tempcl.

7 Gyf ge 86|)h'cc wistun, hwa^t y-;

Ic

wylle mild-heortnessc, and na on
nyssc, nc genydrudc gc tefrc unscyldigf.

8 St')[)lice mannes sunn }*s cac restc-

da'vrt'S hhifurd.

9 Dii >
into liyii

,

''

"'. nd dannn for, he com

iimnge.

10 i)a WR»s da»r an man sc hn^fde for-

Bcnr
•%
ne
dus I
on rcstc-dagimi 1 da't hi WTcliton hjuc.

' uid. And 1
lo. Vs hyt a

^

'

'

'

1

He Bwdc him 96|>hce. Hwjlc man ys
of cow de hn^bl>c an 9ceaj>, and g}f da't
afyl|T rcstc-dai^um on pytt, hii ne nim|>
he dnpt, and hif |» li)*t upp

Witodlicc micle ma mann }'8 sceapc

1

1

;

XL29.-XII. 12.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
29 Take ^e my 50c vpon 50U, and lerne
5e of me, for I am mylde and meeke in
herte ; and 56 sbulen fjnde reste in
5oure soulis.
30 For my 30c is swete,''' and my charge

TYNDALE, 1526.

55
29 Take my yoke on you, and lerne of

me, for Y am meke and loly in herte
and ye shall fynde ese vnto youre soules.

30 For my yoke is easy, and my burden

li3t.^"

is light.

Chap. XTI.

i In that tyme Jhesus
wente by cornys on the sabot day ; for-
sothe his discipb's, hungrynge, bigunnen
to pluc eris of corn, and to ete.

2 Sothely Pharisees seeynge, seiden to
hym, Loo ! thi disciplis don that thing
that is nat leeftil to hem to do in sab-
othis.
3 And he seide to hem, Whether ^e
ban nat rad, what Dauith didde, when
he hungride, and thei that weren with
hym ?

4 Hou he entride in to the hous of
God, and ete loouis of proposicioun,''' the
whiche loouis was nat leeful to hym to
eet, nether to hem that weren with hym,
no but to prestis only 1

5 Or whether ^e han nat rad in the
lawe, for in sabothis prestis in the tem-
ple defoulen the sabothis, and thei ben
with outen grete synne ]

6 Sothely Y saye to 50U, for this is
more than the temple.

7 Forsothe 3if 3e wisten, what it is, I
wole mercy, and nat sacrifice, ^e shulden
neuer han condempnyd innocentis.

8 Trewly mannys sone is, 3he, lord of

the sabot.

Chap. XII.

i In that tyme went
Jesus on the sabot day thorow the corn ;
and his disciples wer anhongred, and
began to plucke the eares off coorne, and
to eate.

2 When the Pharises had sene that,
they sayde vnto him, Behold ! thy dis-
ciples do that which is not lawfull to do
apon the saboth day.

3 He sayde vnto them. Have je nott
reed, whatt David did, when he was an-
houngered, and they alsoo which were
with hym 1

4 Howe he entred into the housse of
God, and ate the halowed loves, whiche
wernot lawfull fFor hym to eate, nether
ffor them which were with hym, but
only for the prestes ?

5 Or have ye not reed in the lawe,
howe that the prestes in the temple
breake the saboth daye, and yet are
blamlesse 1

6 But I saye vnto you, that here is one

greater then the temple.

7 Wherfore if ye had wist, what this
saynge meneth, I requyre mercy, and
not sacrifice, ye wold never have con-
demned inocentes.

8 For the sonne off man is lord even

off the saboth daye.

9 And whenne he passidc thcnnus, he

9 And he departed thence, and went

came in to the synagoge of hem.

I o And loo ! a man hauyngc a drye
And thei axidcri hym, sayingc,
bond.
3if it is leeful to hccle in the sabot ? that
thei shulden acuse hym.

I I Sothely he seide to hem, Who shal
be a man of 30U, that hath 00 sheep,
and ^if it shal faHc doun in to a dike in
the sabotis, whether be shal n;it holde,
and lift it vp ?

12 IIou mochc more is a man bctro

into their sinagogge.

10 And bcholde! there was a man
whiche had his hande dryed vp. And
they axed hym, saynge, Ys yt lawfull to
heale apon the saboth daye? because
they myght acusc him.

1

And he sayde vnto them, Whychc
ys he a mongc you, iff he had a shope,
fallen into a pilt on the sabotli daye,
that woldc not take hym, and lyft hym
out?

12 And liowc mochc ys a man better

56

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt

bftcra ] Witodlice hyt ys alyfwl on restc-
(la;(um wcl to donne.

13 Da cwa3|) he to dam mcnn, A|>cnc
; and hco

dine hand. And he hi r?
waes hal geworden swa -

-r."*"

'

14 Da Sunder-halLran coAun t1a

lit

s6|7lice, and worhton f;t|)(.aht
hync, hu hi h}Tic forspihlon.

oii^m'm

15 Se IIcKlend s6|)lice diet >^'iste, and
ferde danon ; and liim fyligdon myccl
majnigeo, and he haelde hipj calle.

16 And hcbead him, da?t hig hyt nanum

men ne sacdon ;

17 Da}t waere pefylled, da?t de geewed-
en waes J)urh Isaiam, done witegan, dus
cwcdcnde,

18 Her is min cnapa, d<»ne ic gcceas,
min gecorena, on dam wel-gelicode minre
sawle ; ie alette minnc gast ofer hyne,
and dom he boda}) |)eodum.

19 Ne flit he, ne he ne hrymj>, nc nan
man ne gehyrj) hys stemne on stnvtom.

20 To-cwysed hreod he ne for])nit, and
smeoccnde Hex he ne adwa?scji, airdam
de he jtworpc dom to sige ;

21 And on hys naman )>eoda gchyhta|».^

22 Da w;rs him broht an deofol-seoc
man, se was liliiid and dund) ; and he
hyne haehle, swa d.vt he sprwc, and gc-
seah.

23 And da nieniijeo ealle wimdnidon.
and cwwdon, C'wede we is dcs Daiiidcs
sunu ?

24 S6|>lice da da Sundor-hnlLran dis
gchyrdon, da cwa^jKin hig. Xr iIdnT|> (tm
deuilu ut, buton |>urh Belzebub, deofla
eahlre.

25 Se H.Tlend B6|)lice wiste hym ge-
baneas, and cwn?}» to him, A^lc riee de
i»y|i twynvtle on him sylfinn, byji to-worj)-
en, and jclc coaster, odde hiis, do h\]y
widorweard ongcn hyt sylf, hyt ne stent.
26 And gj'f se deoful a«Irif|) ut done
' to-dapletle ; hu ma»g don-

'

deoful, hi -
ue liys 1,

Ian ?

27 And gyf ic |)urh Relzebub acbnfe lii

i\

5
3
8
7
1

;

;

;

5
6
8
1

;

;

XII. I3-27-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

57

than a sheep 1 And so it is leeful to do
good in the sabot.

Thanne he seide to the man, Strecche

1

forth thin hond. And he strei3te forth
and it is restorid to helthe as the tother.

14 Forsothe Pharisees goynge out,
maden a counsel a5eins hym, hou thei
shulden leese hym.

1

Sothely Jhesus witynge, wente awey
thennes ; and many sueden hym, and
he helide hem alle.

16 And he comaundide to hem, that

then a shepe ? Wherfore it ys lefull to
do a good dede on the saboth daye.

13 Then sayde he to the man, Stretch
forth thy hand. And he stretched it
forthe ; and yt was agayne made even
as whole as the other.

14 Then the Faryses went forthe, and
toke counsell agaynst hym, howe they
myght destroye hym.

1

When Jesus knewe that, he departed
thence ; and mochie people folowed him,
and he healed them all.

1

And charged them, that they shulde

thei shulden nat make hym opyn ;

•"

not make him knowne

1

That that thing shulde be fulfilled,
that was said by Ysay, the prophete,
seyinge,

1

Loo ! my chosen child, whom I
haue chosen, my derlyng, in whom it
hath wel plesid to my soule ;
I shal
putte my spirit on hym, and he shal
telle dome to heithen men.

19 He shal nat stryue, ne crye, nether

eny man shal here his voice in stretis.

20 He shal nat breke to gidre a schak-
en reed, and he shal nat quenche smok-
ynge flax, til that he cast out dome to
victorie

2

And liethen men shulen hope in his

name.

22 Thanne a blynd man and doumb,
hauynge a deuel, was oflPrid vp to hym ;
and he helide hym, so that he spac, and
say.

23 And alle the cumpanyes wondreden,
and saiden, Wher this be the sone of
Dauith ?

24 But the Pharisees, herynge, sciden,
He this castith not out feendis, no but
in Belzabub, prince of fendis.

25 Sotlicly Jhesus, witynge her thou^tis,
seide to hem, Eche kyngdam departid
a3cins hym self, shal be desolat,^ and
echo citcc, or lious, departid a3cins it
self, slial nat stondc.

26 And ^if Sathanas castitli out Sa-
^hanas, he is departid a3eins liyni self
therfore hou shal liis kyngdam stondc 1

27 And 3if I in Belzabub cast out

17 To fulfyll that which was spoken

by Esay, the prophet, which sayeth,

1

Beholde ! my sonne, whom I have
chosen, my derlinge, in whom my soule
hath had delite ; I wyll put my sprete
on him, and he shall shewe iudgement
to te gentyls.

19 He shall not stryve, he shall not
crye, nether shall eny man heare hys
voyce in te streetes.
20 A brosed rede shall he not breacke,
and flaxe that begynneth to burne he
shall' not quenche, tyll he sende forth
iudgement vnto victory

2

And in hys name shall the gentyls

truste.

i2 Then was brought to hym, won
possessed with a devyll, whych was both
blynde and domne ; and he healed him,
insomuch that he which was blynd and
domne both spake, and sawe.

23 And all the people were amased,
and sayde, Ys not this the sonne of
David 1

24 When the Pharises herde that, they
sayde, He dryveth the devyls no nother
wise oute, but by the liel])pc off Belse-
bub, the chefe of the dcvylls.

25 But Jesus knewe their thoughtes,
and sayde to them, Every kyngdom de-
vided with in it sylfe, shalbc desolate,
housholdc,
nether
dcvydcd aycnst it sylfe, contynue.

shall eny cite, or

26 So if Satan cast out Satan, then ys
sylfe ; howo

lie dcvydcd ayenst liim
shall then liys kyngdom endure'?

27 Allso yf Y by the liclppc of Bclzc-

58

GOTHIC, 390-

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

(leofla, j)urh Invtrnc adrifaj) cowre beam 1
Funluin hig sylfe bco|) cowre deman.

28 Gyf ic soj'licc on Godcs Giste a-
wurpe (leoflu, wito<riice on eow becynij)
Godes rice.

29 0«1(1eliu iiKiv; i":i" in^'anonstrnnjjea
hu.s, and hys fata hyiie bi-mitian, biiton
he gcbinde wrest 'done strangan, and
donne hys bus bcrcafigel*

30 Sc dc nys mid me, be is onpjen me |
and sc do ne gadcni)) mid mo, be
to-wyri)|>.
31 Fordam ic sccrc cow, iclc synn
and bysinur-spraec l»y|) foriTAfm niati-
num, sc)|)lice d:rs Hali^an Gastcs bysmur-
spncc nc by)> fur<j:yfcn.

32 Ami swa bwylc swa cwyj' word on-
pen manncs sunn, bim by|> forj^^yfon ; sc
de 86|)Hce cwy|) ongcn Haligne Gast, ne
hy\> b) t byni forjxyfcn, nc on disse wor-
uldc, no "H <i«'t<' t(»\\ raldan.

33 Odde wyn't'a|> ^ud treow, and bys
wea.stm «;6(bio ; oddo wyrcca|Mfel trcow,
and liys wa»stni yfcbie ; witodlicc be dam
wcastmmc by|> da't trcow oncnawcn.

34 La gc nnpdrcna c}'nr}n, bii marjon
ge god sprocan, donne gc 8>iit yfeb" ?
S6}>lice of d:cre heortan willan sc nui|>

Bpic|>.

35 God mann 86|)Hcc of gotbim gold-
be >rdc bring)) god for|>, and yfel mann of
yfelum gold-horde bring}* yfcl for|>.

36 St)|>lioc ic sccgc cow, da^t a'lc idol
wonl de mcnn sprocaj), hi agyldaj> gc-
Bcead be dam on domes da*ge;

37 S<»jiHcc of dinnm wordnm dii byst
gcrybtwisod, ami of dtnuni wordnm dii
byst gcnydcroti.^

'

1 sumcdaboc-
38 Da an'1
.. m, dus cwcd-
eras and <1 t
ende, Larcow, we wyllaj) snm tacn of de
gescon.

39 He andswannlc bym and rwa^}\
Yfcl cncorjs and forligcr secj? tacn, and

;

;

XIL 28-39.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

59

deuelis, in wliom''' ^oure sonys casten
Therfore thei shulen ben 50Ure
out 1
domys men.

2 8 Forsothe ^if I in the Spirit of God
caste out fendis, therfore the kyngdam
of God is cummen in to 50U.'''

29 Ether hou may eny man entre in
to the hous of a stronge man, and take
awey his vessel is, no but first he shal
byude the stronge man, and than he
shal rauyshe his hous 1

30 He that is nat with me, is a^einus
me ; and he that gadrith nat to gidre
with me, seatrith abrood.
31 Therfore Y seye to 50U, al synne
and blasfemye shal be for30uen to men,
but the spirit of blasfemye shal nat be
for30uen.

32 And who euere shal seie a word
a5eins mannys sone, it shal be for5ouen
to hym ; forsothe he that shall seye a
word a^eins the Holy Goost, it shal nat
be for30uen to hym, nether in this world,
ne in the tother.

33 Ether make ^e the tree good, and
his fruyt good ; ether make 3e the tree
yuel, and his fruyt euyl ; forsothe a tree
is knowen of the fruyt.
34 3e generacioun of eddris, howe mowe
50 speke good thingis, when 5e ben yuel 1
Sothely the mouth spekith of the grete
plente of the herte.
35 A good man brengith forth good
thingis of good tresoure, and an yuel
man bryngith forth yuel thingis of yuel
tresour.

36 Forsothe Y seie to 30U, for whi of
eucry ydel word that men spoken, thei
shul 3eldc resoun thcrof in the day of
dome

37 For of thi wordis thou shalt l)e
iustificd, and of thi wordis thou ahult be
dampnyd.

38 Thannc sumc of the scribes and
Pharisees answoredcn to liym, soyingc,
Maistre, we wolden sc a tokne of thee.

bub cast out devyls, by whose helppe do
youre children cast them out *? Therfore
thei shalbe youre iudges.

28 But if I cast out the devyls by the
Sprete of God, then ys the kyngdom of
God come on you.

29 Other howe can a man enter into a
mighty mannes housse, and violently
take awaye his godes, excepte he fyrst
bynde the stronge man, and then spoyle
hys housse 1

30 He thatt ys not with me, ys agaynst
me ; and he that gaddereth not with
me, scattereth abrode.

31 Wherfore I say vnto you, all maner
off synne and blasphemy shalbe forgeven
vnto men, but the blasphemy against
the Holy Goost shall not be forgeven
vnto men.

32 And whosoever speaketh a worde
agaynst the sonne off man, it shalbe
forgeven him ; but whosoever speaketh
agaynst the Holy Goost, yt shall not be
fforgeven hym, no, nether in this worlde,
nether in the worlde to come.

33 Other make the tree good, and his
frute good also ; or els make the tree
evyll, and his frute evyll also ; for the
tree ys knowen by hys frute.
34 O generacion of vipers, howe can
ye saye well, when ye youre selves are
evyll ] For of the aboundance of the
hert the mouthe speaketh.
35 A good man oute of the good trea-
sure of hys hert bryngeth forth good
thynges, and an evyll man out off his
evyll
evyll

treasure bryngeth forthe

thinges.

36 But I say vnto you, that of every
ydell worde that men shall have spoken,
they shall gcve a countes at the daye off
iudgement

37 For by thy wordcs thou shalt be
iustifyed, and by thy wordes thou shalt
be condemned.

38 Then answered ccrtaync off the
scribes and off the Phariscs, sayngc,
Master, we woldc faync se a sygnc of

tlic.

39 The whiche answcrynge soith to
hem, An iuci generacioun and auoutrcrc
sekith a tokne, and tokne shal ruif be

39 He answered them sayngc, The
evyll and a<lvoutrous generacion sekotli
a signo, but there shall no signc bo

60

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[^t. Matt.

li>TC nc h\\t nan tacn gescaUl, l.ut.i,
loiiafi tacn, rtacs wit<*giin.
40 \Vit<Kllice Bwa swu lona« wnps t.ii
rta?8 hwwlcs inn»)|>c })ry dapis nnd |>reo
niht, 8wa l»yl> iimiiiies sunn on cor}mn
hcortan )>ry dapaa and |>reo niht.
41 Niniuetisce wcras jtr;fta|> on dome
mid dysse cneor}-8«e, and hi^' j^'tny(!oria|>
hip ; fordam de big dydon dwd-botc on
lonas bodunge, and dcs is mara dimnc
lonas.
42 Su|>Hljcle8 cwen ar^st on dome
mid dissc cneonsfic, and beo peny<1tn»|i
lii;^' ; fordam de bco com fram landi-s
Salomonea
^'cniarum,
wisdom and dcs is mara donnc Salom-
on.

gcbyranne

to

43 S6|)licc donne se uncLxna ^'mi ut-
fti'r|> fnim menn, be iii(-\> ^'coiid dnge
stowa, secendi- nstP. ami lie ue gemct.

44 Donnc cwyl) ho, Ic rrcryrre on m?n
biis, danon ic ut-eotle. And cuinendo he
f,'emet byt nemtitf, and geclacnsod mid
besnmm, and gcfnctwod.

.

45 Donne gap|> be, and bim to-penim|>
seofun odre pistas, ^^yrsan dt)nne be ;
and iniran<;endc biix eardiLjea{> daT. And
donne wurdaj' da*s mannen ytemestan
wyi-san donne da wrran. And swa by}>
dvsse wyrrestan ci-
'46 Da be das |^

pyt spnrc to
dam maniegum, du stod b}*8 moilor antl
bis fjebrodra da*r utc, scccndc spnvcon
to bim.
47 St>[»Ucc d.i cwa^|> sum to bim, Wit-
oillicc! din modur and dine gebrodra
8tanda|» bcr lite, do seoende.

4S Antl he andswaroile bym soorrend-
ura. and cwn»J», IIw)lc ys min modur?
juid Inv
4^ A

bys band on bis
leoniinp-cnibUw, and cwa^|>. [Her is raiu
mtnler

* •• " crebr(V!ra ?

'

'

> J

^

50 NS .:

.\lc swa wntcJj
mines foKler willan dc on bcofenan is,
be is min brodur, and min swustor, and
modor.

1

XII. 40-50.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526

!

61

5ouen to it, no but the tokne of Jonas,
the prophete.

40 For as Jonas was in the womb of
a whall three days and three ni^tis, so
mannus sone shal be in the herte of the
erthe three days and three ni3tis.

4

Men of Nynyue shal ryse in dome
with this generacioun, and shulen con-
dempne it ; for thei diden penaunce in
the prechynge of Jonas, and loo ! here
is more than Jonas.

4 2 The queen of the south shal ryse in
dome with this generation, and shal
for she came fro the
condempne it ;
eendis of the erthe, for to here the wis-
dam of Salomon, and loo ! heere is more
than Salomon.

43 Forsothe whan an vnclene spirit
shal go out fro a man, he goth by drye
places, seekynge reste, and he fyndyth
nat.

44 Thanne he saith, I shal turne a5ein
in to my hous, fro whennys Y came out.
And he cummynge fyndith it voide,
clensid with biemes, and maad faire.

I self ; and thei

45 Tlianne he goth, and takith seuen
otlier spiritis with hym, worse than hyra
eiitrynge yn dwellen
there. And the last thingis of that man
ben maad worse than the former.
So it

i shal be and to this worst generacioun.

46 3it hym spekynge to the cumpanyes
his modir and his bre-
l of peple, loo !
' theren stoden with outeforth, seekyng

for to spcke to hym.

47 Sothely sum man saide to hym.
Loo ! tlii modir and tin brethren stonden
witli outforth, seekynge thee.

48 And he, answeryngc to the man
; yngc to hym, seith, Who is my modir ?

. ,.d wl)0 ben my brethren ]
49 And lie holdynge forth his bond in
liis disciples, seiile, Loo ! my modir

l<)

id my l>rethcren ;
,0 'J'nuly wlioeuer doth the wil of my
fidir tliat is in heuenes, he is my bro-
llicr, suster, and modir.

gQven to them, but the signe of the pro-
phete, lonas.

40 For as lonas was thre days and thre
nyghtes in the whales belly, soo shall
the Sonne of man be thre days and thre
nightes in the hert of the erth.

41 The men of Ninivite shall rise at
the day of iudgement with this nacion,
and condemne them ; for they repented
at the preachynge of Jonas, and beholde
a greater then Jonos ys here.

42 The queue of the south shall ryse
at the day of iudgement with this gene-
racion, and shall condemne them ;
for
she cam from the vtmost parties of the
worlde, to heare the wisdome of Solo-
mon, and behold I heare is a greater then
Solomon.

43 When the vnclene sprete is gone
out of a man, he walketh throughout
dry places, seking reest, and fyndeth
none.

44 Then he sayeth, I will retourne
ageyne into my housse, from whence I
cam oute. And when he is come he
fyndeth the housse empty, and swepte,
and garnisshed.

45 Then he goeth his waye, and taketh
seven spretes, worsse then liym silfe ; and
so entre they in and dwell there. And
the ende of that man is worsse then the
Even so shall it be to this
beginnyng.
frowarde nacion.

46 Whill he yet talked to the people,
beholde ! hys moder and his brethren
stode with out the dores, desyring to
speake with him.

47 Tlien won said vnto him, Behold I
thy moder and thy brethren stond with-
out, desiringe to speke with the.

48 He answered, and sayd to him that
tolde him. Who is my mother 1 or who
are my brethren ?

49 And he stretched forth his liond
over his diHcii)le.s, and stiyd, Behold ! my
mother and my bicthren ;
50 For whosoever fulfdleth my fathers
will whichc is in lieven, he is my brother,
my suster, and my mother.

02

UUTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

1

;

Chap. XIII.

1 On dam dage dam
Ha'leiidc ut-gungunduin of hibe, he s&'t
wld du 8JC.

2 And iiiyclc raa?nipeo waeron pes4im-
node to hym, swa dii*t he eo<le 011 scyp
Hiiil diLT «ct ; and call sco maenigeo
8t6d on duni WHr()|>e.

3 And he spnec to him fela on bigspol-
! ut-code se i»«cd-

luin, cwtd<n«l»

.

erc^ liys 8a:d t«> .^. •>, .iue.

4 And da da he scow, gume hig feollon
\N'id weg, and fuglas cumun, and seUm
du.

5 S6))lice 8ume feollon on stirnihte,
da;r hyt naifde mycle eor}>an : and hmnl-
Hcc up
»n, fordam de hig na*fdon
da-re v ^
\ pan.

6 S6|)lice up-spningenre sunnan, liig a-
druwudon, atjd foi*scinincon, fordam de
hig na'filon wyiirum.

7 S6|)Hce 8ume feollon on J>onias ; and
da |>ornas weoxon, and for)>r\'smudon
da.

8 Sume s6|)Hcc feollon on g6<le eor|»«m,
and sealdon weastm ; sum hund-fraldne,
sum sixtig-fealdne, bum |)rittigfeuldne.

9 Sc de h«?bl>e earan to gehyreuue,

gehyre.

10 And dii genealschton his leoniinjj-
cnihtiis and cwsdon to hym, For hwig
spyc.st du to hym mid hiir^jM-llum ?

1

J>a andswarode he hym, Konlam
de eow is geseald to witanne heofona
rices gerynu ; and him nys ua geseald.

1 2 So|)liee dam de h:vf|> him l»y|) ge-
seald, antl he ha'f|> ; so)'lice Re do n.i'fji,
and d&*t de he iia'f)> him hi|> a^throih-u.

'••

13 FtirdiiMi io

I mill M;^-
spellum, fordam «!
liig ne go-
8eo|>. and ^ehyrendc hig nc gehyni|>, ne
ne

s

1 4 i ...

. on him »y gefylle<l Eniiias wit-
egimg. Of gehymyHHo ge gehyni|>, and
gc ne ong> t4i|> ; and loeieude ge geseoj*,
and gc ne g»'j*eo|t

15 S(*i|>lice dises folces heorte is aliyrd,
and hig hefeliee mid eanim gehyrdun,

1

2
1

XIII. I-I5.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

63

Chap. XIIL

i In that day Jhesus
iioynge out of the lious, sat besidis the

bee.

2 And manye cumpanyes of peple ben
gedrid to hym, so that he steyinge vp
ill to a boot sat ; and al the cumpanye
stode in the brynke.

3 And he spak to hem many thingis in
parablis, seiynge, Loo ! he that sowith,
goth out to sowe his seed.

4 And the while he soweth, sum felden
byside the weye, and biiddis of the eyre
camen, and eeten hem.

5 Sothely other seedis felden into stoony
placis, wher thei hadden nat moche
erthe ; and anoon thei ben spruugen vp,
for thei hadde nat depnesse of erthe.

6 Sothely the sunne sprung vp, thei
swaliden,^ and for thei hadden nat roote,
thei drieden vp.

7 Forsothe other seedis felden amonge
thornis ; and the thornis wexen vp, and
strangliden hem.

8 But other seedis felden in to good
lond, and 5auen fruyt ; sume an hundred
fold, another sexti fold, another thritti
fold.
9 He that hath eris of heerynge, heere

he.

10 And disciplis cummynge to seiden
to hym, Whi spekist thou in parablis to
hem ?

1

The whiche answcrynge seitli to
hem. For to 30U it is ^ouen for to knowe
the mysterie''" of the kyngdam of heuenes;
but it is nat 3ouen to hem.

12 For it shal be 30uen to hym that
hath, and he shal have plentee ; trewly
wiio that hath nat, that thing that he is
Been to haue shal be taken awey fro

I

I

I

1.3 Therforc I speke to hem in paiablis,
for thei seeynge see nat, and tliei heer-
ynge hecren nat, nether vndirstonden ;

14 That the prophecie of Ysay seiynge
I be fultillid in hem, With lieerynge 30
shulen lieerc, and 3ee sljulen nat vnder-
stonde ; and 3ee seeynge simlen see, and

I jec sliulen nat see ;

15 For the li(!rte of tliis pej»lc is cn-
iattid, and thei herden greuounly witli

Chap. XIIL

i The same daye went
Jesus out oflf the housse, and sat by the
see syde.

2 And moch people resorted vnto him,
so gretly that he went and sat in a
shyppe ; and all the people stode on the
shoore.

3 And he spake many thynges to them
the

in similitudes, sayinge, Beholde !
sower wentt forth to sowe.

4 And as he sowed, some fell by the
wayes syde, and the fowlles cam, and
devoured it vppe.

5 Some fell apon stony grounde, where
it had not moche erth ; and a non it
spronge vppe, because it had no depht
off erth.

6 And when the sun was vppe, hitt
cauth heet, and for lake off rotynge,
wyddred awaye.

7 Some fell amonge thornes ; and the

thornes arose, and chooked it.

8 Parte fell in goode grunde, and broght
forth good frute ; some an hundred fold,
some fifty fold, some thyrty folde.

9 Whosoever hath cares to heare, let

him heare.

10 And hys disciples cam and sayde to
him. Why speakest thou to them in
parables 1

1

He answered and sayde vnto them.
Hit is geven vnto you to knowe the
secrettes off the kyngdom of heven ; but
to them it is not geven.

1

For whosumever hath to him shall
hit be geven, and he shall have abound-
ance ; but whosoever hath not, from him
shal be takyn awaye even that same that
he hath.

J 3 Therfore speake Y to them in simi-
litudes, for though they se, they se not,
and hearinge they heare not, nether
vnderstonde ;

14 And in them ys fulfylled the pro-
phesy of Esay which ])ro[)hesi sayth,
With youre cares ye shall heare, and
shall not vnderstonde ; and with youre
eyes ye shall se, and shall not pcrceave ;
15 For this peoples hert ys wexed
grosse, and their cures were dull of

04

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

9

and hyra ca^n hcclyadon, t1o-I;i»s
6fre mid eu;,ann j^eseon, and mid earuin
•ri, and mid hcortiin oni:ytoii, und

liijr

,, ynede, and ic hig geliaile.

id Soj^Hce eadigc spit eowre eaf^
|>, and eowre car

fordain de hi-.' •"
fordani de hi-

:|>.

17

S6|>Hce ou euruiwt ic eow 8coi,'(
divt manej^ witoj^oin and rihtwlse i^twil-
nudon da ))ing to gcsc<»inu- ^\,^ <^r ^ts. ..ji,
and hig ne geaawon, and gchyrun da |»ing
dc gc gehyra|>, and hig ne g'ehyrdon.

18 Gehyre ge sojiHce da» sawcntlan

bigspell.

1

.KIc daera de Godes wurd pchyr|>.
and ne ongyt, donne cym[> deoful, ami
])ereafa}> dwt on hys heortJin asawcn is ;
d;L't is se de wid done wcg iLiawun is.

20 S6}>lice se dc * - ^ n. ^ n
, wunl

is, dis is sc de d;«
and hni'dlice da»t mid Miss.' onfeh|>.

i

21 86|)lice hyt naf|> dom* wyrtnim on
him, ac is hwihvendh'c
CJcwordrnre ge-
drcfechiesse and ehtnesse for dam wurde,
hra'dlicc hig beo|» ge-untreowsode.

22 S6|ilice diet de asawen is on |H)rnum,
diet is so dc dirt wurd gihyij-, and donne
eornfulhiess dissc wornM
disaa wonild-welona for
wurd, and hit
wordon.

is biitan woastme ge-

'

'

23 So|>Hcc da>t de aatiwen wr»s on d.Tt
gotle huid, da»t is se de dn?t wurd ge-
hyr|i, and oniryt, and done wcitstm
Ami donne de[> sum huml-
h»ing|).
foahhie, sum sixti-fealdnc, sum |>ritti-
fcahhie.
24 He rehtc him da (h!.'- '•- - ;>c]. and
dus cwa'ji, Heofena rice is _
.. n dam
nuMi gelic, de scow g6d sajd on his
wcyrc.

25 S6|>Iice, d.l da men 8lci>on, da com
Ids fconda sum. and ofcr-seow hit mid
coccile on middan diim
hwa'tc, and
fiTilc danon.

26 S6|)h*cc da SCO wyri weox, and done

XIII. i6-26.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

9
1

;

C5

eris, and thei han closid her ee5en, tliat
sum tyme thei see with ee^en, and with
eris heeren, and vndirstonden in herte,
and thei ben to gidre turned, and I heele
hem.
i^^i6 Forsothe 30ure ee^en that seen hen
ffjessid, and ^oure eris that heeren.

herynge, and their eyes have they closed,
lest they shulde se with their eyes,
and heare with their cares, and shuld
vnderstonde with their hertes, and shulde
tourne, that Y myght heale them.

16 But blessed are youre eyes for they

se, and youre eares for they heare.

c 1 7 Forsothe I saye trewthe to 50U, for
many prophetis and iuste men coueit-
iden to see thoo thingus that 5ee seen,
and thei saien nat, and to heeren thoo
thingis that ^ee heeren, and thei herden
nat.

17 Verely Y say vnto you, that many
prophetes and perfaicte men have desired
to se tho thinges which ye se, and have
not sene them, and to heare tho thinges
which ye heare, and have not herde
them.

1 8 Therfore heere 36 the parable of the

18 Heare ye therfore the similitude off

sowynge man.

\g Eehe that heerith the word of rewme,
and vndirstondith nat, the yuel spirit
Cometh, and rauyschith
that that is
sow}^n in his herte ; this is that is sowen
besidis the weye.

20 Sothely he that is sowen on the
stoon, this it is, that heerith the word of
God, and anoon with ioye takith it.

2 T Forsothe he hath nat roote in hym
self, but it is temporal. • Forsothe tribu-
lacioun and persecucioune maad for the
word, anoon he is sclaundrid.

22 Bot he that is sowen in thornys, is
this that herith the word, and the bysy-
nesse of this world, and the falsnessis of
ritchessis stranglith the word, and it is
maad with outen fruyt.

the sower.

1

When a man heareth the worde of
the kingdom, and vnderstondeth it not,
there cometh the evyll man, and catcheth
awaye that which was sowne in hys hert
and thys is he which was sowne by the
waye syde.

2

20 But he that was sowne in the stony
grunde, ys he, which heareth the worde
of God, and anon with ioye receaveth itt.
Yet hath he no rottes in him selfe,
and therefore he dureth but a season.
For as sone as tribulation or persecucion
aryseth because of the worde, by and by
he falleth.

22 He that was sowne amonge thornes,
ys he that heareth the worde off God,
but the care off this worlde, and the
dissaytfulnes off ryches choke the worde,
and so ys he made vnfrutfull.

23 Bot he that is sowen in to good
lond, is this that herith the word, and
vndirstondith, and l>ryngthe forth fruyt.
And sothely sume makith an hundre-
fold, treuly another sixtyfold, forsothe
anotlier thrittifold.

24 Another paral>le Jhesus puttc forth
to hern, soyinge. The kyngdam of hcuenes
is maad licho to a man, that sow good
seed in liis fccld.

25 But, when men slcpten, liis cnmyc
tlic

came, and sew aboue derncl^ in
.midil of whete, and wcntc awcy.

23 He which is sowne in the good
grounde, ys he that heareth the worde,
and vnderstondeth it, which also bcrctli
And bringcth forth, some an
frute.
hundred folde, some fyfty folde, and
some thyrty folde.

24 Another similitude put he forth
vnto them, saynge, The kyngdom off
licven ys lyke vnto a man, which sowed
good sccdc in his fcldc.

25 l>utt, whyll men shlcpte, thcr cum
liis foo, and sowed tares amonge the
whcatc, and went his waye.

26 Sothely when the

herbc had(h

26 When the blade was sj»rongc vj), and

r

I

GG

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

weastin brohtc, da n tcwdc Be coccel
hi lie.

27 Da coilon (1ns l.'i.ilorJes
ami cwA-don. lllufi>nl, l>u ne mow «Iu
god 8;i d on diiium acere ? hwanou ba-fdc
be cocceH

ruwa.s,

)

28 Da cwirj) he, Dfft dyde unliold-
niann. Da cwudon da |>eowa8, W)lt du
we ga)), and gaderia|» big ?

29 Da cwa»|> be, Nesc, delays ge done
bwu te awurtwdion donne ge done coc-
col gudcria}\

30 La'taji aV'der weaxan od rip timan ;
aiid on dam riiKinian ic secgc dam r p-
enim, Gadria}) wrest done coccel, and
bindaj) sceaf-maclum to forba-rncnne, and
gadnaj> done bwaete into niinum bcnie.

31 He rebtc liim da p}t oder bigK]>cl,
dus cwedende. T
, ricc is gcwi.rdon
t scow se man ou
gelic senepes d
liys aecre.

'

32 Dnt is oalra weda l.vst, s6)»lice don-
ne bit wyx|». bit is ealra wyrta mast,
and bit wyrj) treow ; swa da-t bcofnan
fublas cuma|>, and canlia)) on bis lK)gmn.

33 Ho pprjpc to bim oder bigsprl, and
'' dam
dus rwaji, Het^fcna ncc '
bnirman, done da't wif 01
.ml \*e-
liydde on |)rim gemetum mclwcs, od bo
w.TS call abafon.

34 hlalle diU |>inp so Htclend spncc
mid bigspcllum to dam worednm. and
nan )»ing uo spnec be biitan bigspel-
lum,

35 Da't ^irrc gcfylK*d Atn wTtogan
cwyde, Ic atj-ne nrnno mu|> mid big-
'-.rclneiisc fnim mid-

jj, |„,,i: -

11....,^

...

.

>idcs gc>'

^0.

36 He forlet da da mirnccrco. and com
to bis inne : and dii genoalvbton to bim

'

bif*

libtas. and cwa'cb^n. .Vr« -

<»

us '...-I

. „ ^all da*a bwactca and d;* 3

ooocclcf.

'

XIIL 27-36.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

67

growid, and maad fruyt, thanne the
deruel''' apperiden.

27 Forsothe the seruauntis of the hus-
bondeman comynge ni3, seiden to hym,
Lord, wher thou hast nat sowen good
seed in thi feeld 1 wher of than hath it
dernel 1'^

28 And he seith to hem, The man
enmye hath don this thing.
Trewly the
seruauntis seiden to him, Wolt thou we
go, and gedren hem ?

29 And he saith, Nay, lest perauenture
5e gedrynge dernels^ draw vp by the
roote togidre with hem and the whete.

30 Suffre 5e hem bothe wexe til to
rype corne ; and in tyme of rype corn I
shal seie to reperis, First gedre ^ee to
gedre dernels,^ and byndeth hem to
gidre in knytchis^ for to be brent, but
gedere ^e whete in to my berne.

31 An other parable Jhesus putt e forth
to hem, seiynge. The kyngdam of heu-
enes is like to a corn of seneuey, the
whiche a man takynge sewe in his feeld.

32 The whiche trewly is leest of alle
seedis, but when it hath wexen, it
is
most of alle wortis, and is maad a tree ;
so that briddis of the eyre cummen, and
dwellen in bo wis ^ therof.
33 An other parable Jhesus spac to
hem, The kyngdam of heuenes is lie to
Boure dow3, the whiche taken, a wom-
man hidde in three mesuris of meele, til
it were al sowrdowid.

34 Jhesus spac alle these thingis in
parabhs to the cumpanyes of peple, and
he spac nat to hem with outcn parablis,

had brought forth frute, then appered
the tares also.

27 The servauntes cam to the house-
holder, and sayde vnto him, Syr, sowed-
est not thou good seed in thy closse 1
from whence then hath it tares 1

28 He sayde to them. The envious man
Then the servauntes
hath done this.
sayde vnto hym, Wylt thou then that we
go, and gader it ?

29 And he sayde, 'Nay, lest whyll ye
go aboute to wede out the tares ye
plucke \^pe also with them the wheate
by the rottes.

30 Let bothe growe to gether tyll
harvest come ; and in time of harvest I
wyll saye vnto my repers, Gadther ye
fyrst the tares, and bynd them in sheves
to be brent, but gadther the wheete in
to my barne.

31 Another parable he putt forthe vnto
them, saynge, The kyngedom of heven
ys lyke vnto a grayne of mustard seede,
whycli a man taketh and soweth in his
felde.

is growne, it

3 2 Whych ys the leest of all seedes, but
when it
is the greatest
amonge yerbes, and is a tree ; so that
the bryddes of the aier come, and bylde
in te braunches of it.

33 Anothere similitude sayde he to
them, The kyngdome of heven ys lyke
vnto leven, which a woman toke, and
hyd in iij peckes off meele, tyll all was
levended.

34 All these thynges spake Jesus vnto
the people by similitudes, and withoute
similitudes spake he nothinge to them,

35 That it shulde be fulfillid, that thing
that is seid by the prophete, seyinge, I
shal opyn my mouth in parablis ; I shal
bolke out^ hid thingus fro makyng of
the world.

36 Thanne the cumpanyes laft, he came
into an hous ; and his diHciplis camen
Di3 to hym, seiynge, Expounc to vs the
parable of dernelis^ of the feeld.

35 To fulfyll, that which was spoken by
the proi)het, sayinge, I wyll open my
mouth in similitudes ; and wyll speako
forth thingcs whych have bene kepte
secrete from the begynnynge off the
worlde.

36 Then sent Jesus the people awaye,
and cam to housse ; and liys disciples
cam vnto him, saynge, Declare vnto va
the similitude of the tares off the felde.

F 2

68

GOTHIC, 3C0.

1

;

«

ANGLO-SAXON. 995.

[St. Matt.

37 T^'

'

clat

niclc he liim, Se dc scow

••** ">!»»! lies 8UI1U ;

3S S«')|'Hcc 80 a^cyr

is

tics mitUlan.

tl.i't

iiOilv sail, t1j« t

^'t'ftnl ;
lu'ofonKcan rices )>eam, se cocccl syut
86|>lice tia nianfullan l»eam ;

BViit t1a

39 Se unlioUIa-iiiaii se de done coccel
8o|»liee d«t rip is
seow da»t is deoful ;
WiiruUle ondiinjj, da rii»eni8 syn*
40 Kornustlice swa swii se co

^e^auUrutl, and mid fyre forbairned, swa
by^ on wonilde endun^e.

;

}»

4

Mannes sunu sent his enijlnfl, and
lii ^'adria|) of his rice ealle ^etbefci Incase,
and da de unriiitwisnes.se w)Tcea|>

42 And usenda|> liig on fyres ofen, daer

byj) wop and tojm gristbitung.

4 ^ Donne 8eina|> da rilitwisan Bwa
sunne, on hyra fabler riec.
de earan to gehyranne ha'f(>. j

[Geh

swa
86

yre,

44 ^lleofona rice is pelic ijehyddum
gold-honle on dam ipcere, done btliyt
se man de liine fint ; and for his blyssc
ga'ji, and 8yl|» call d«'t he ah, and gcbig|>
done a»cer.

45 Eft is 1
crc, de sohl

''

' im mang-

*>t ;

.

46 Da he funde dat an dcorwynto
nierej;rt)t, da cihIc he, and scaMc call
da«t he jihte, ami Iwhtc da-t mereijrot

' m

'•'

47 I 'ft

is heofena r

,.. tf.. ,.t, ^1,1 MT^ and ot .4.....

;_

!ulum ;

c 1**

48 Da hi da da^t nett upp-atu^on. and
bo dam Htnmde, da ^ccuron hig
i.m on hyra fatu. da yflan hig

•

H^*urj»on lit.

.

40
Da .
of da'ra godra midlene.

^

-TC.

-^i

,

:

«;o And aworpn|» hijj on da^ fyres ofon :

daT by|> wop and to|>a gristbitun^'

1

f,

Onjr}to pe ealle d:i8

j^ing ?

Dii

cwGcdou hig. Witodlicc wc hit ongytaji.

;

;

;

;

XIII. 37-51.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

;

69

37 The whiclie answerynge saith, He
that sowith good seed is mannes sone

38 Sothely the feld is the ^Yorld ; bot
the good seed, these beu sonys of the
kyngdam, dernels,"*" forsothe these ben
yuel sonys ;
39 But the enmye that soweth hem is the
feend; but the ripe corn is the eendyng of
the world, sothely the repers ben aiigelis.
40 Therfore as dernels ben gedrid to
gidre, and brent in fijr, so it shal be in
the eendyng of the world.

41 Mannes sone shal sende his angels,
and thei shulden gedre of his rewme
alle sclaundris, and hem that don wick-
idnesse

42 And thei shulen sende hem into the
chyraney of fijr, there shal be weepynge
and betynge togidre of teeth.

43 Thanne iust men shulen shyine as
the sunne, in the rewme of her fadir.
He that hath eris of heerynge, heere he.

44 The kyngdame of heuenes is lijk to
tresour hid in a feeld, the whiche a man
that fyndith, hidith ; and for ioye of it
he goth, and sellith
alle thingis that
hath, and bieth the ilk feeld.

45 Eftsoiies the kyngdam of heuenes
is lie to a man marchaunt, seekyng good
margarytis

46 Sothely 00 preciouse

margarite
founden, he wente, and soldo alle thingis
that he hadde, and bou3te it.

47 Eft the kingdam of heuenes is He
to a nette sent in to the see, and of alle
kynd of fishis gedrynge ;

48 The whiche whan it was fulfillid,
men ledynge out, and sittyngc bysidis
the brynkc, chcesidcn the good into her
vessels, but thei senten out the yuel.

49 So it shal be in the eending of the
Angelis shulen gon out, and
world.
shulen departe yuel men fro the mydil
of iusto men.

50 And thei shulen sende hem into the
chymiiey of fijr ; there shall be weep-
ynge and betynge togidre of t^'cth.

51 Hun ^ec vndcrstonden alle these

thingis 1 Thei scicn to hym, 3hc.

I

37 Then answered he and sayde to
them. He that soweth the good seed, ys
the Sonne of man ;

38 The felde ys the worlde ; the chil-
dren of! the kyngdom are the good seed,
the evyll mans children are the tares

39 But the enemy which soweth them
is the devill ; the harvest is the end of
the world, and the repers be the angels.
40 For even as the tares are gaddred,
and brent in the fyre, so shall it be in
the ende off this worlde.

41 The Sonne off man shall send forth
his angels, and they shall gadther out
off his kyngdom all thinges that do
hurte, and all them which do iniquite ;

42 And shall cast them into a furnes
shalbe waylynge and

of fyre, there
gnasshyng off teth.

43 Then shall the iuste men shyne as
bryght as the sun, in the kyngdom of
Wosoever hath eares to
their father.
heare, let him heare.

44 Agayne the kyngdom off heven is
lyke vnto treasure hidde in the felde,
the which a man founde, and hidde it
and ffor ioy there of goeth, and selleth
all that he hath, and byeth that felde.

45 Agayne the kyngdom off heven is
lyke vnto a marchaunt, sekynge after
good pearles

46 Which when he had founde one
precious pearl e, wentt, and soldo all that
he had, and bought it.
47 Agayne the kyngdome off heven is
lyke vnto a neet cast in to the see, that
gadcreth off all kyndes of fysshes ;

48 Which when it is full, men drawe
to londe, and sitt, and gadre the good
in to their vessels, and caste the bad
awaye.

49 So shall it be at the ende of the
The angels shall come, and

worlde.
sever the bad from the good.

50 And shiill cast them into a fumes of
fyre ; there slialbe waylinge and gnassh-
ynge of teth.

51 Jesus sayde vnto them, Have yc
vnderstondc all those thyngesl They
sayde. Ye, Syr.

70

GOTUIC, 360.

'

[St. Matt.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
52 Da Bsede he him, Fordam is srlc
pelwrecl ]»6cere on heofcruin rice j^dio
dam liiretles cuKlre, i!c for)>-l»ring)) of his
gold -horde niwe [fing and ealdc.

53 And hit wwi gewordcn, da 8C Haf*!-
cnd ge-cndode das big«i»cl, da fcrde he
dunone.

54 And da he com to his earde, he
lacrde hij^ on hyra jjcsaniiiiin^n^iin, swa
dii't hig wundrodon, and cwa'don, 1 1 wan-
on ys dysuni dea wisdom and dis nins^'tn ?

r>5 WitmlHcc do« i8 8mi|>08 sunn ; hii ne
hatte hys niodorMariat and liys brtSdru,
lacob, and loscpli, and Simon,
and
Iu(hi.s 7

r^O And hii ne synt callc hys swustra
mid us ? llwanon synt dysum calle das
)>ing?
57 And hig wttron gc-untrywsotle on
him. Da soJrHce B&^de so Iltclend him,
Nys nan witega hiitan wnr|>s<;>']>o, hutou
on hys carde, and «'i> ^\ -^ liiisc.

58 And he ne worliU- d.vr manega

mnpgcna, for hyra uugeleafuhiy&sc.

Chap. XIV. i On dirre tide gcliyrdo
Ilermles sc feor^n daSles rica da» llael-
endes hlisan ;

2 And da ssede he his cnihtum^ i^es is
lohannes se Fulluhtere de ic behcafd-
and fordan synd
odr. ho iirns of
Ails wundni gtl;

v on him.

"

3 S6|>Hce Hcro<iej» nam lohannem, and
pc])and !»ync, and sette on cwortorn for
diim
llerodiadcn I'hilippes hys

wife

brotlor.

4 lohannes him swde, Nys dc alyfed

hi to wife to hn-bbmnc.

/; And da he h^Tie of^lean woldc, lie
fidred him dn?t folc ; fordam de hig
ha'fdoii hync for RM

6 Da on HoriMb- _

- ge, tnnd)-
u<lo dn?rc HenHiiacliscran dohtur befor-
an 1

1 hit hVodo Hcrodo.
t hr mid .m|>o byre to sj'llenne,

7 i

swa hwwt 8wa hco hyne b^e.

]

XIII. 52.-XIV. 7-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
52 He seith to hem, Therfore euery
wiyter tau^t in the kyngdam of heuenes,
is lie to an husbonde man, that bryngith
forth of his tresour newe thingis and
olde.
53 And it is don, whanne Jhesus hadde
eendid these parables, he passide fro
thennis.

54 And he, cummynge in to his cun-
tree, tau3t hem in her synagogis, so that
thei wondriden, and seiden, Wherof to
hym this wisdam and vertues 1

55 Wher is nat this the sone of a smyth?^
"VYher his modir be nat seid Marie ? and
his brethren, Jamys, and Joseph, and
Symount, and Judas ^

56 And his sistris, wher thei alle ben
Therfore wherof to hym alle

nat at vs 1
these thingis 1
57 And so thei weren sclaundrid in
Forsothe Jhesus seide to hem,
hym.
A prophete is nat with outen wirshipe,
no but in his owne cuntree, and in his
owne hous.

58 And he dide nat there manye ver-

tues, for the vnbyleue of hem.

TYNDALE, 1526.

71

52 Then sayde he vnto them, Therfore
every scrybe which is coninge vnto the
k}T3gdom of heven, is lyke an housholder,
which bryngeth forth out of hys treasure
thynges bothe nevfe and olde.

53 And hyt cam to passe, when Jesus
had fynnesshed these similitudes, that
he departed thence.

54 And cam into his awne countre, and
taught in there synagogges, in so moche
that they were astunyed, and saide.
Whence cam all thys wysdon and power
vnto him ?

55 Is not thys the carpenters sonne?
Is not hys mother called Mary "? and hys
brethren be called, James, and Joses,
and Symon, and Judas 1

56 And are not hys systers all here
with vs] Whence hath he all these
thynges

57 And they wer hurte by him. Then
Jesus sayde vnto them, There is no pro-
phet with out honoure, save in hys awne
countre, and amonge his awne kynne.

58 And he dyd not many myracles

there, for there vnbelefes sake.

Chap. XIV.

i In that tyme Eroude

tetrarcha^ herde the fame of Jhesu ;

Chap. XIV.

i In that tyme Herod
the tetrarcha herde off* the fame of Jesu j

2 And seide to his children, This is
Jon Baptist, he hath risen fro dead, and
therfore vertues worchen in hym.

3 Forsothe Eroude helde Joon, and
boundc hym, and putte him in to pri-
soun for Erodias, the wif of his brother.

2 And sayde vnto his servauntes, This
is Jhon Baptist, he is risen agayne from
deeth, and therfore hys power ys so
greate.

3 For Herod toke Jhon, and bounde
hym, and put hym in preson ffbr Hero-
dias sake, hys brother Thips wyfc.

4 For Joon saide to hym, It is nat

leful to thee for to haue hir.

5 And lie willynge to slea hym, drede
for thei haddcn hym as a

the pcple ;
prophete.

6 Forsothe

in the day of Eroudis
birthe, the dou5tcr of Erodiaw Iccptc in
the mydil, and ])lesidc to Eroude.

7 Wlif-rfore with an ooth Ik; ]>y]ii3tc
for to 5eue to hir, what eucr thinge she
haddc axid of hym.

4 For Jhon sayde vnto hym, Hit ys

not lawfuU for the to have her.
5 And when he wold have put hym to
deeth, he feared the people ; because
they counted hym as a prophet.

6 Wlicn Ilerodcs birth daye was come,
the doughtcr off' Herodins daunscd bo-
fore them, and ])1 cased Herod.

7 Wherfor he promysed Avitli an oth
that he woldc gcve her, whatsoever she
wolde axe.

7«

GOTHIC. 360.

.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
8 V' '•wTi.ji heo, fram hjTC metier pe-
io n»o on dnuin disce lulmii-

[St. Matt.

myii.

ne.M 1

'

Iiihtercs.

9 l-".. ".. ^
a|»e. ninl for

"•-'*

<" r <1iim

.*

.

.

10 And he asonde da, and bcheafdmli

lolmnncm on dam cwerteme.

I I And man Imthte du his henfiMl on
nnuin diBce, and seaUle dam inu'.K lu-.
and du't msrden h>Tc meder.

I 2 An<l (!'

' liiijj^-
......i, and
cnihtiiH nnti .....
Inhyrj^don hyne ; and comun and cyd-
dun liyt dam Ha'lriide.

.....

13 })a se Ila-knd dat gcliyrdc, da
fcnlc he danon tni-«nn<iron on anura
hni ma*iiiueo
- 'ivrdou, hig Ijh^m.iu him of dam

And da d»

flcyi»e.
d *
l.

'..'••

'

14 Ami .t'
mycil«- iii.ii;
and giha'lde da untruman.

15 ?!oli!*ii^ •]* hyt wws »fon !•-«.. r.l..n,

t4m hvM loomii)

*

him*
and liiitt to
and timn ys . .
etreo, da»t hi fai
him mete hic;,'enn.
"

1 6 Da cw.i '
hi ne<x1e to :

.h,

-.>,

n-
• dils lairp)., and

'

*

' -n.Nal.l.a}'

ilU rt;in.

licr, i

t8 iVi cwR>|)

nd, Hnnj^j) me

,

-.:.il da he hel da meneijn ofer dn*t
gten hi titUn, and he nam da fif hi ifa.i
and twepen fix
beaeali on done
heofon. and hi
^,.-..^
,^f^ hla/aa,
and H4>a]dc hi«
im : and
hi dam folec.

20 And hi irton ralle, and >>
And hi nrimon da 1

fyll««<le.
wyiian fulle d«>rn j^ehntaena

if

2 2 And d .

Itit

8c lla^lend hm

1

5
2

XIV. 8-22.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

8 And she bifore monestid^ of hir
modir, seith, ^eue thou to ms hidir the
hed of Joon Baptist in a dische.

9 And the kyng was sorowful, but for
he 00th, and for hem that seeten to
dre at the mete^ he comaundide to be
uen.
10 And he sente, and bihedide Joon in

TYNDALE, 1526.

73
8 And she beinge informed of her mo-
ther before, sayde, Geve me here Jhou
Baptistes heed in a platter.

9 And the kynge sorow^d, neverthe-
lesse for his othes sake, and for their
sakes which sate also att the table, he
comaunded yt to be geven her.

10 And sent, and behedded Jhon in

^he prisoun,

the preson.

11 And his heed is brou5t to in a
dische, and it is 5ouen to the whenche,
^ad she bare it to hir modir.

12 And his

disciplis cummjnge to
token his body, and biryeden it ; and
thei cummynge tolden to Jhesu.

13 The whiche thing when Jhesus
hadde herd, he went fi'O thennus in to a
And
boot, in to desert place besidis.
whenne the cumpanyes of peple hadden
herd, thei folowiden hym and on the
feet fi*o citees.

14 And Jhesus, goynge out, saw a
gi'eet multitude of peple, and hadde
rewthe of hem, and heelide the sike men
of hem.

15 Sothely the euenynge maad, his
disciplis camen ni3 to him, seiynge. The
place is desert, and the hour hath now
passid ; leeue thou the cumpanyes of
peple, that thei, goynge in to castels,
bigge meetis to hem.

16 Forsothe Jhesus seide to hem, Thei
han nat needc to go ; 3eue 30 to hem
for to ete.

17 Thei answeridcn, We han nat here,

no but fine looues and two fishis.

18 The whiche seith to hem, Brynge

jee hem hidir to me.

19 And when he hadde comaundid the
cumj)anye for to sitte to mete on liay,
fyue looues and two fishis taken, he by-
holdynge in to heuen, ])lesside, and brak,
and 3iiuc to his disciplis ;
sothely the
disciplis 3auen to the cumpanyes.

20 And alle ecten, and w(,'rcn fiilfillid.
And tlici token the relifis of broken
gobetis, twelue cofyns ful.

2

Forsothe the nouiiibre of men etynge
was fyue thousand of men, out taken
wemmen and litel children.

22 And anon Jhesus compellide^ the

11 And his heed was brought in a
platter, and geven to the damsell, and
she brought it to her mother.

1

And his disciples cam and toke vp
his body, and buryed it ; and went and
tolde Jesus.

13 When Jesus had herde that, he de-
parted thence by shippe, into a desert
place out of the way. And when the
people had herde therof, they folowed
him afote out of there cites.

14 And Jesus went forth, and sawe
moche people, and his herte dyde melte
vppon them, and he healed ofi' them
those that were sicke.

1

When even was come, his disciples
cam to him, saynge. This ys a deserte
place, and the daye is spent ;
let the
people departe, that they maye go in to
the tonnes, and bey them vytaylles.

16 But Jesus sayde vnto them. They
have no neade to go awaye ; geve ye
them to eate.

17 Then sayde they vnto him, We
have here but .v. loves and two fysshes.
18 He saide, Bringe them hydther to

me.

19 And he comaunded the people to
syt downe on the grasse, and toke the
.V. loves and the .ij. fysshes, and loked
vp to heven, and blessed, and brake,
and gave the loves to his disciples ; and
the disciples gave them to the people.

20 And they all ate, and wcr suflised.
And they gadered vj) of the gobbctcs
tliatt remained, xij baskctes full.

2 J They that ate were in nombro about
V. M. men, besydc wemcn and children.

22 And strayght way Jesus made his

GOTHIC, 360.

ANQLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. ^^ATT.

Icominjj-ctiihtaa on scyp a«tigan, and
tofonin him faran ofer done mu|>an, ocl
da?t he da menej^i forlcto.

23 And da he hii^ f
co<le on done muiit, :.
geba?d.

'- * n hnfdc, he
>e d.iT ana
S6|)h"cc dii li}*! acfen was, he

WJI

24

• wtn d«t scyp of dam
wa>8

y|>um totorfod, fordam dc h)*t
Btnmfj wind.

25 })u com 80 Ilselend embc done feor|>-
an han-cred to him, ofcr da sae gang-
ende.

26 Da hi pesawon da-t, hi t^nirrhm pe-
drcfede ; and for dam ej^e clyivxlfin, and
cwaedon dua, S6|>h'ce h}-t ys scinlac.

27 Da gpnec se Hwlend, an«l rwir|»,
Habha}> goleafan, ic hji, com ; nellen ge
cow ondra-dan.

28 Da andawanxle him Pctrus and
cwa?|>, Drihten, gj*f dii hyt cart, hat me
cunian to de ofer dsis wa^toni.
29 Da cwa*)) he, Cum to mc.
Dii eodo
Pctrus of dam scype, ofer d.rt waiter
da-t he to dam Htclcndc comr.

30 Da he peseah done stntnirr' " ' ^

he him oudred ; da he wcar|> ^
he cwiej), Drihten, gedo me hahie.

•,

31 And di hnedh'ce*

he gefr-npc hyne, and
dus cwaj*, La lytles geleafiui, hwi twyn-
edcst dd ?

32 And da hi w»ron on dam sc^-pc,
geswac so wind.

33 '^I'l'lice da, dc on '"tn"^ ^-'vpo wtcron,
n, and du.>4

comon, and to him .
cwic<lon, S6}>lice, dii cart Ciwlcn Bunu.

34 And d.I higofcr-Rcpclodon, hi comon

on da«t hind Clonojiareth.

3"; And da da^t *"

^

^ vTir •_'.

sen«Ion gi»ontl eal.
on to him ealle untrume.

.

il

. an .

36 And bync hirdon, diet hig huni-
)>inga his reafnt fnipd irt-hrinon ; and
•wd hw}lce his ipthrinon wurdon hsile.

XIV. 23-36.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

75

disciplis for to go vp in to a boot, and
go bifore hym ouer the see, til that he
lefte the cumpanyes.

23 And the cumpanyes left, he stei^ide
vp in to an hill aloone for to preye.
Sothely the euenyng maad, he was there
aloone.

24 Sothely the boot in the mydil see
was thro wen with wawis, forsothe the
wynd was contrarie.

25 But in the fourthe wakyng of the
ni5t, he came to hem walkynge aboue
the see.

26 And thei, seeynge hym walkynge
aboue the see, weren distourblid, sey-
inge, For it is a fantum ; and for drede
thei cryeden.

27 And anoon Jhesus spac to hem,
sayinge, Haue ^e trust, I am ; nyl ^e
dreede.

28 Sothely Petre answerynge seide,
Lord, ^if thou art, comaunde me to cume
to thee vpon the watris.

29 And he seith, Cume thou. And
Petre goynge doun fro the bote, walkide
on the wateris for to cume to Jhesu.

30 Trewly he, seeynge a strong wynde,
was aferde ; and whan he bygan for to
be drenchid, he cryede, seyinge. Lord,
make me saaf.

31 And anoon Jhesus, holdynge forth
the bond, cau3te hym, and seith to hym.
Thou of litil feith, whi hast thou doutid i

32 And whenne he hadde stied vp in

to the boot, the ^vynde cesside.

33 Sothely thei, that weren in the
boot, camen, and worshipiden hym, sey-
inge, Veryly, tliou art Goddis sone.

34 And whenne he liad passidc ouer
the see, thei camen in to the lond of
Genesar.

35 And whenne men of tlint place
Imddon k no wen hym, thei sen ten into
al that cuntree ; and thei offriden to
hym al hauynge yuol.

36 And thei prcyiden hym, that thei
shulden touohe ether the hem of the
clothing of hym ; and who cucr touch-
iden ben maad saaf.

desciples enter into a shippe, and to goo
over before him, whill he sent the peple
a way.

23 And as sone as he had sent the
peple a way, he went vp into a moun-
tayne alone to praye. And when nyght
was come, he was there hym silf alone.

24 And the shippe was in the middes
of the see, and was toost with waves, for
it was a contrary wynde.

25 In the fourthe watche of the night,
Jesus cam vnto them walkynge on the
see.

26 And when hys disciples sawe him
walkynge on the see, they were amased,
sayinge. It is some spirite ; and cryed
out for feare.

27 And streyght waye Jesus spake
vnto them, saynge. Be of good cheare,
it is Y ; be not a frayed.

28 Peter answered and sayde. Master,
and thou be he, bidde me come vnto
the on the water.

29 And he sayde. Come. And when
Peter was come doune out of the shyppe,
he walked on the water to go to Jesus.

30 But, when he sawe a myghty winde,
he was afrayed ; and as he began to
synke, he cryed, sayinge. Master, save
me.

31 And immediatly Jesus stretched
forth his honde, and caught him, and
saide to hym, O thou of lytell fayth,
wherfore diddest thou dout 1

32 And as soone as they were come in

to the shippe, the winde ceassed.

33 Then they, that were in the shyppe,
cam, and worshypped him, sayinge, Of a
truth, thou arte the Sonne off God.

34 And when they were come over,
they went in to the londe of Genazareth.

35 And when the men of that place
had knowledge of him, thoy sent out in
to all that countre rounde about ; and
brought vnto him all that were sickc.

36 And besought him, that they myght
touche the border of hys vesture only ;
and as many as touched hytt were made
safe.

I

76

GOTHIC, 360.

4

;
.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

Chap. XV.^ i Da comon to liini fnun
Ilirnisalrm da boceras and Farisiiscc,
and cwjrdon,

2 Hwi for^ymn)) dine leominp-rnihtits
iii hyra

nc |>wea|>
lire } Ulrina laj,'e ?
handa, dunue big mete ^icgea|>.

3 Da andsworode be bim and [cwa'j*/]
Hwi forgymc ge Godes bcbod for eowrc
lage ?

4 Witodlice GcmI cwjtJ*, Wurjm dinnc
fa»dcT and nu)<lor, and sc do wyn^|» bya
iieder and modor, sweltc sc dca|>e.

5 S<)|)lice ge cwcdu|>, Swa bwylo swa
BCfr\, bya fn?dcr and nicder. Swu bwylc
lac 8wa of nu' is, frt'nia}> de ;

6 And ne wcor|)ia|> fatb-r and nuMlor

and pc ft)r nabt dydon Godcs Ixbod for
cowrc bige.

7 I^ b'ccotcras, wol be eow witegodc

Isaias, se wtega, da be cwn|).

8 Dis folc me mid welenim weor|ia|>,*.
.... and byra beorte is feorr fram me ;

9 Butan intingan big me wurjia}*, and

Uera|> mauna laru.

10 And be da, dam mencgiim tojrwHb^ro
geolypeiiuni, dus cwae^, Gcbyra|», and
ongyt«|>.

11 Ne besmit done mann, dirt on bys
mii|> prjt ; ac bync bcsmit, d«et of bye
mu|>e gac|>.

13 !)a penonla'bton byn It'ornin^-rniht-
aa and cwa^b^n, W"-» \'\, da t da Far-
disuin wnnio
ueisccan nynt gi
gebyn^bmi f

I ? Da ands^v— '

'

ung. do niin i
ode, by|> Bwurtwaloii.

.l-Tlo plant-
r nc plant-

1

I^tA|i bi ; big synt Idinde. and
Sc blinda ^iyf be
bbndra bUto«twaM.
blindnc lirt, big fealla)> begcn on icnne

15 Da and8waro<lc bim Pctnis* .

.

.,

A'rccc us dis bigs|>cll.

;

3
1

;

XV. I-I5.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

77

Chap. XV.

1 Thanne scribis and
Pharisees camen ni3 to hym fro Jerusa-
lem, seyinge,

2 Whi thi disciplis ouerpassen"^ tlie
tradiciouns'*' of elder men 1
for thei
washen nat hondis, whenne tbei eten
breed.

3 Sothely he answerynge seith to hem,
And whi and 56 breken the maunde-
ment of God for ^oure tradicioun 1

4 For whi God seide, Hououre thi fadir
and thi modir, and he that cursith fadir
or modir, dye he by deth.

5 But 3e seyn, Who euere shal saye to
fadir or modir, "WTiat euere 5ifte is of
me, it shal profite to thee ;

6 And he hath not worshipid his fadir
or modir ; and ^e ban made the maunde-
ment of God voide"^ for 3oure tradicioun.

7 Ipocritis, Ysay, the prophete, pro-

Chap. XV.

i Then cam to Jesus
scrybes and Pharises from Jerusalem,
sayinge,

2 Why do thy disciples transgresse the
for they
tradicions of the seniours ?
wesshe.not there hondes, when they eate
breed.

3 He answered and sayde vnto them,
Why do ye also transgresse the com-
maundment of God thorowe youre tra-
dicions 1

4 For God commaunded, sayinge, Hon-
oure thy father and moder, and he that
speaketh evyll ayeynst hys father or
mother, shall suffer deeth.

5 But ye sale, Every man shall saie to
his father or mother, Whatsoever thyng
I offer, that same doeth profyt the

6 And so shal he not honoure hys
father and mother ; and thus have ye
made that the commaundment of God is
with out effecte through youre tradicions.
7 Yypocrites, wel prophesied off you,

pheciede wel of 50U, seyinge,

Esay. sayinge,

8 This peple honoureth m.e with lippis,

forsothe her herte is fer fro me

9 Trewly thei worshipen me with outen
and

tecbynge

doctrines

the
cause,
maundements of men.

10 And the cumpanyes of peple clepid
to gidre to hym, he seide to hem, Heere
56, and vnderstonde.

11 Nat that thing that entrith in to
the mouth, defoulith a man ; but that
thing tbat cummeth forth fro the mouth,
defoulith a man.

12 Tbanne his disciplis cummyngc ni^
geiden to hym, Wost thou, tbat, this
word herd, Tharisees ben sclauudrid ?

13 And lie answerynge seith, Eucry
plantynge, the whicbe my fadir of bcuen
hath nat plantid, shal be drawen vp by
the rooto.

14 Suffrc 3c hem; thei ben blyndc,
and ledcris of blynde men.
Sothely 3if
a blyiid man ymo, lodyngc to a l)lyiid
man, botbe fallen douu in to tlic dicbe.

15 Forsotbe Petre unswcryiige saidc to

hym, Expouu to vs this parable.

8 This people draweth nie vnto me
with there mouthes, and honoureth me
with their lippes, yet their hert is farre
from me ;

9 But in vaine thei worshippe me,
teachinge doctrine which is nothing but
mens precepts,

10 And he called the people vnto him,
and saide to them, Heare, and vnder-
stonde.

1

That which goeth in to the mougth,
defyleth not a man ;
but that Avhich
commeth out of the mougth, defyleth
the man.

12 Then cam his disciples and sayde
vnto hym, Perceavest thou, howe tbat
the Pharyses are offended, bearinge thys
saynge 1

1

He answered and sayde, All plantcs,
which my hevenly father
nott
planted, sbalbe plucked vppc by the
rotes.

hath

14 Lett them alone ; they be the blyndc
leddcrs of the blyndc.
If the ])lyn(]o
lecdo the blindc, boothe shall fall in to
the (lyche.

15 Then answered Peter and sayd to

him, Declare vnto vs thys parable.

7a

GOTUIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
16 Da Aiidswarocle he him, And synt

[St. Matt.

ge jj}t hutan and^'yte ?

17 Nc onpjtcge, da»t call (\xt on done
inu|> f^^, gae|> on da wambc, and by|> on
fur))gang ascnd ?

18 S6|)lice du |iiii,j de of darn inu|>c

mi|>, cuma|> of d.-rrc iKortaii. jin.l
Ijcsmital) done mann.

<l;i

19 Of dfrre heortan <

. jmnc-

aa, maun-slybtaa, uui....

stala,^

lease

li^ini,
word,

for-
gewitnys^a, t.iJIico

..1,

20 })is synt da |>in<v dc douc mann
I)csniita|> ; ne Wsinit done niaiin^ dcuh
he uii|)\vogeuum haudum ctc.^

21 And da ferde se Hsclend danon, on

Tyriscc and Sidonisce cndas.

22 And efnc ! da of dam Clin
gonia'rum clypodc sum wif, :
Drihten, Dauidos sunu, gcmilt.Ha me;
miu dohtor ye yflc mid dcofle gedreht.

'" um

i-j*,

23 Da ne fje-andswaro<le he liyre.

Da
goncala'hton hys leornintj-cnilitas ami
him to cwiedon, Forlwt hig. fordain heo
cly|>a|i a»ftcr us.

24 f)a andswarode he, Ne cuin ;.

i^rnd,
]»uton t*> dam sccapun de fonn'unlon of
I^rahela hune.

2'^ Da eom hco, :
and dus cw:i'|», Di 1

'

'

' rrd,

26 Da cwa'|» he, Nys hit na gcnl d.vt
man nime beama hlaf, and hiindum
worj)e.

27 Da ewn>|> heo, Drihten, da t y%
•o}» ; wito«lliro da hwrl])»M eta|» of dam
cninmm, do of h>Ta liiiifonla I>e<»dum
fealla|..

28 Da iind.twaro

du wif. niycrl mi mmi -. 1. /i
de, raUwii dii wyllo.
tide w:vM hyrc dtjhtor luU geworden.

Aii-i

ton h}To. Kala!
'^

29 Dii se Hirlrmd danon fcnle, eft he
com wid da GaliUi.^oean 9«e. And ast.iU
on done munt-, and d.vr not

30 Da genealirhton him to mycclo
menegu, mitl him ha*bbende mnncga

XV. i6-3o.]

WYCLIFl^^E, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

79

16 And he seide, 5it aud 36 ben with-

16 Then sayde Jesus, Are ye yett with

out vnderstondjng ?

outen vnderstondinge 1

17 Whei' 56 vnderstonde nat, that al
thing that entrith in to the mouth, goth
in to the wombe, and is sent out in to
the goyng awey 1

18 But tho thingis that cummen forth
fro the mouth, gon out of the herte, and
tho thingus defoulen a man.

19 For of the herte gon out yuel
thou3tis, mansleayngis, auoutries, forni-
caciouns, theftis,
femyes.

fals witnessis,

blas-

20 These thingis it ben that defoulen
a man ; sothely for to ete with hondis
vnwashen, defouleth not a man.

21 And Jhesus gon out fro thennys,

wente into parties of Tjn-e and Sidon.

22 And loo !

a womman of Canane
gon out of the costis, cryede, seyinge to
hym, Lord, the
son of Dauid, haue
mercye on me ; my dou3ter is yuel tra-
ueilid of a deuyl.

23 The whiche answerid nat to hir

word. And his disciplis cummynge to
preyeden hym, seyinge, Leeue thou hire,
for she crieth after vs.

24 Forsothe he answerynge seith, I am
nat sent, no but to the sheep of the hous
of Yrael that perishiden.

17 Perceave ye not, that whatsoever
goeth in at the mouth, descendeth doune
in to the bely, and ys cast out in to the
draught 1

18 Butt those thinges which procede
out of the mought, come from the herte,
and they dyffyle a man.

19 For out of the herte come evyll
thoughtes, murder, breakyng of wed-
locke, whordom, theefte,
falce witnes-
berynge, blasphemy.

20 These are the thinges which defyle
a man ; but to eate with vnwesshen
hondes, defyleth nott a man.

21 And Jesus went thence, and de-
parted in to the costes of Tire and Sidon.
2 2 And beholde ! a woman which was
a Cananyte cam out of the same coostes,
and cryed vnto him, saynge, Have mercy
on me, Lorde, the sonne off Dauid ; my
doughter is
pytiously vexed with a
devyll.

23 And he gave her never a worde to
Then cam to him his disciples
answer.
and besought him, sayinge, Sende her
awaye, for she foloeth vs cryinge.

24 He answered and sayde, I am not
sent, but vnto the loost shepe of the
housse of Israhel.

25 Bot she came, and wirshipide hym,

25 Then she cam, and worshypped

seyinge, Lord, help me.

26 The whiche answerynge seith, It is
nat good for to take the breed of sonys,
and sende to houndis.

27 And she seide, 3be, Lord ; forwhi
and the litel whelpis eten of the crum-
mys, that fallen doun fro the bord of
her lordis.

28 Thanne Jhesus answerlnge seith to
hir, O ! thou womman, thi feith is grete ;
And
be it don to thee, as thou wolt.
hir dou3tcr was heelid fro that hour.

29 And whcnnc Jhesus haddc passide
thcnrics, ho came bisidis the sec of Gali-
lee. And he steiyngc in to an hyl, sat
there.

30 And many cum])anyes camcn ni3 to
hym, hauyngc with hem doumbe men

him, sayinge, Master, sucker me.

26 He answered and saide. It is not
good to take the childrens breed, and to
cast it to whelpes.

27 She answered and saide, It is
truthe ; neverthe lesse the whclppcs eate
of the crommes, which fall from there
masters table.

28 Then Jesus answered and sayde vnto
her, O ! woman, greatc ys thy fayth ;
be hit to the, even as thou dcsyrest.
And her doughter was made whole even
at that same tyme.

29 Then Jesus went awaye from thence,
and cam nye vnto the sec of Galylc.
And went vppe in to a mountayne, and
sat doune there.

30 And mocho peo])le cam vnto hym,
havinge with them halt, blinde, donmc,

i

80

GOTHIC, 36o.

AXOLO-SAXOX, 995.

[St. Matt.

hca1t« nml blinde, and wanhale, and
manoga odre ; and alcdon to livs fotum,
and hr

' " t^

3 '

"^

' mjrnc^fU wxmdredor

gcsconde dumbc spreccndc, healtc gav
endc, y '
jcfioondc ; and hig nia
odon I
I (lud.^

\\\h

32 Da c\v.i»|> so Ila-leiid. foi-ri^dorr gc-
cly|>ediiin
leoniing-ciiilituin. Disse
meno;,ni ic gcmiltJiige, fonlam liig j^ry
dn;:n8 mid nic wuntnlon, and hig nai>l>-
n|>
ncllo
ic
liij; on wci,'e

fa'stendc t

liwa^t '

liig

-^

l

getoorian.

33 Da cwaMJon li\
1 1 war ninie we ^\N;i
wcstcne, dat we gefyllan swa niycelo
niR'Hoi^ni ?

...j

34 f)a cwjr|> he, llii ftla hlafa hn-Mns
ge I Da cwa^don liig, Seofon, and fcawa
fixa.

35 And he behead <1a clnet sco mcnegu

Scitc ofer c!n»re cor|>an.

'

'

'

''

s

36 And he nam d.-i dn
and da fixas, and hmv, ;.
leoniing-cnihtum ; and hig sealdon dam
folcc.
37 And l»ig a?ton ealle. and wirron
gef) lle<le, and dn?t tolafe wir« of dam ge-
hrote. 1
38 ^^

*,,n wilian fulle.
r wton w.'vron f<M>-
wer |»uscnd manna, hiitan cililum and
wifuni.
39 And he forlet da da monr-ji. )iii<i
etnlc on seyp, and com on da ciulua
Magetlou.

Cif AP. XVI.^

I And Al gencala'hton
liim to Farisei and Sidtiwi and hync
costoihin, and ha'don dat he him sum
tacen of he<»fone n^ty wde,

2 \h\ anil«war.Mle he him an»l ewa-|»,
- on h}-t hyjl

' T^ -

On tt'fen gc cw- '
HUiylte weiler.

,

, a»l ;

3 And on nxi

I ij\ To da?g

XV. 3 1. -XVI. 3-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYjSTDALE, 1526.

81

and crokid, feble and blynde, and many
othir j and castiden hem doun at his
feet. And he helide hem,

31 So that the cumpanyes wondriden,
" ^eeynge doumbe men spekynge, and
Jdd goynge, blynd men seeynge ; and

, aei magnyfieden God of YraeL

32 Sothely Jhesiis, his disciplis gedered
to gider, seide, I haue rewthe of the
cumpany of peple, for now the thridde
day thei dwellen still with me, and thei
han not thing whiche thei shulen ete ;
and Y wole nat leeue hem fastynge, lest
thei failen in the weye.
33 And the disciplis seyen to hym,
Therfore wherof so many loouys to vs
in desert, that we fulfille so grete a
cumpanye of peple ?
34 And Jhesus seith to hem, Hou
many loouys han ^ee 1 And thei seiden,
Seuene, and a few smalle fishis.
35 And he comaundide to the cumpany,
that thei shulde sitt to the mete vpon
the erthe.

36 And he takynge seuen looues, and
fishis, and doynge thonkyngis, brak, and
^aue to his disciplis ; and disciplis ^auen
to the peple.
37 And alle eten, and weren fulfiUid,
and thei token that that was ouer of
relyues, seuene lepis fulle.

38 Forsothe thei that eten weren foure
thousand of men, with outen litil chil-
dren and wemmcn.

39 And, the cumpanye of peple laft,
he styede vp in to a boot, and cam into
the coostis of Magedan.

maymed, and other many ; and cast
them doune at Jesus fete. And he healed
them,

31 In so moche that the people won-
dred, to se the domne speake, the maym-
ed whole, the halt to go, and the blinde
to se ; and they glorifyed the God of
Israhel.

32 Jhesus called his disciples to him,
and saide, I have compassion on the
people, because they have contynued
with me nowe iij dayes, and have 110-
thinge to eate j and I wyll not let them
departe fastinge, leste they perisshe in
the waye.
33 And his disciples sayd vnto him.
Whence shuld we get so moche breed in
the wyldernes, as shulde sufFyse so greate
a multitude 1

34 And Jesus sayde vnto them, Howe
many loves have ye ? And they seyde,
Seven, and a feawe fysshes.

35 And he commaunded the people, to
syt doune on the grounde.

36 And toke the seven loves, and the
fysshes, and gave thankes, and brake
them, and gave to hys disciples ; and
his disciples gave them to the people.
3 7 And they all ate, and were suffysed,
and they toke vppe of the broken meate
that was lefte, vij basketes full.

38 They that ate were iiij M. men, be-

syde wemen and chyldren.

39 And he sent awaye the people, and
toke shyppe, and cam in to the parties
of Magdala.

CuAP. XVI.

I And Pharisees and
Baduceis temptynge him camen ni3 to
hym, and j)reiden hym for to shewe to
hem a tokenc fro hcueiic.

2 And he an.swerynge seith to hem,
The ceuenyngc maud, 30 scicn, It shal
be cleer, for the hcuenc is lijk to reed ;

3 And the morwe, To day tempest, for

Chap. XVI.

i Then cam to hym the
Pharises with the Saduces also and dyd
tcmpte hym, dcHyringe tliat ho wohl
slicwc them sonic signe from hevcn,

2 He answered and sayde vnto tlieni,
Att even, ye siiyc, We shull luivo fayrc
wc<ldcr, and tliiit ])ecauHC the nkyc ys
reed ;

3 In the moiiiiiigc ye snye, To dnyo

82

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

hyt l)y|> hrcoh wwler, deos lyfl Bcni|»
unwwlerlice. Nu cunne gc tocnawan
hc'ofonw hiw, w to«IIIce ge nc niagon
witan da?ra t «la t.cnu.

4 Sco yfelc cncoryss nn«l unnht-luiin-
cntle ticcn scr|> ;' ami hvre
geseald, Imton lonas tncen, rta*s wilcguu.
And, him forlseU-num, he fcnle.

nc

l.y|>

5 And da hi.s lcorninR-cnihtai» comon
ofrr done mu})an, hig furgcton diet hig
lilafa.s nanion.
6 Anil da hrmIc he, Gymft|>, and wani-
ia|> fram dam bcornian Furiseorum and
Snduci'onim.

Dii |'(liton hig bctwnx him, and

7
cwaedon, Numon we hUfas mid us ?

8 Da BC Hwlend wiste h}Tn go) ftncft«,
he cwirj) to him, IIwR»t |>enee ge betwwx
cow lytlcs geleafaii, d«t gc hlufaa nahh-
a)>)

9 Ne undcrstnndc gc gyt» ne ge no
gebencea[» dnra fif hlafa and fif j^iisend
and hu fcla wyligcna gc luunou t

10 Ne <l«pa ieofon hhlfa an«l feower
j-uscnd mannii, and hu fcla wyligcna ge
uamon ?

11 Hwi lie ong}-te go int, dR»t ic ne
' >ni bcorni-

Bwtlo he hlaf»\ War
an Fariseorum an^l •

- • -'"^ '

12 Da ongeton

ho 110 paMo,

lari

1

.

I ^ \V t

1 sr Ha'lond on da
i. and aliscwlr hys
dwhw C'« >- irr:r
leoniingcniht4iA, H\va>nc »ecgca)> mcnn
dct sy manncfl sunu 1

_

14 Dn rwspdon hiu. Sumr Tohanncm
«"'"«

.

i<

lu', Hwa*t >•

na

.1 .

t ic

done 1
Hirrr:

1 - pi -.«

81 i

10 l>u anu^warcxlo him Pctnis, Du cart

diM Ivfigendee GwU s sunu.

17 Da andswarodc him 8C ITa:knd,

XVI. 4-17] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

83

1

heuen shyneth heuy."''
Therfore ^e lian
knowe to deme wisely the face of heuen,
but 5e mowen not wite the tokenys of
tymes.

4 The yuel generacioun and avowtrer
sekith a tokne ; and a tokene shal nat
be 5ouen to it, no but the tokne of
Jonas, the prophete. And, hem forsaken,
he wente aAvey.

5 And whenne his discii^lis camen ouer
the see, thei for3aten for to take loouys.

6 The whiche seide to hem, Beholde 56,
and beth war of the sourdow3 of Phari-
sees and Saducees.

7 And thei thou5ten amonge hem, sei-

ynge. For we han nat taken loouys.

8 Forsothe Jhesus witynge seide to
hem, What thenken 5e amonge 50U of
litil feith, for ^e han nat loouys 1

9 3it 5e vndirstonden nat, nether han
mynde of fyue loouys in to fyue thou-
sand of men, and hou many cofyns 50
token 1

I o Trewly nether of seuen loouys in to
four thousand of men, and hou many
lepis 5ee token 1

I I Whi vndirstonden ^e nat, for I seide
nat to 50U of breed. Be ^e war of sour-
dow3 of Pharisees and of Saducees ?

12 Thanne thei vnderstoden, that he
seide nat to be war of sourdow3 of
loouys, bote of the techynge of Pharisees
and Saducees.

13 Sothely Jhesus came in to the
parties of Cesarie of Philip, and axide
his disciplis, seyinge, Whom scyn men
to ben manncs sone 1

14 And thei seidcn, Summc Joon Bap-
tist ; other forsothe Hcly ; but other
Jcremyc, or oon of the j)rophotis.

15 Jliesus seith to hem, Sotliely whom

Beien 3c me to be 1

16 Syrnon Pctrc answoryngc Hcide,Thou

art Crist, the sonc of (Jod lyuynge.

17 Forsothe Jhesus answoryngc seide

.

shalbe foule wedder, and that because
the skye ys troubbelous and reed.
ye
ypocrytes, ye can discern e the fassiou
of the skye, and can ye not discerne the
sygnes of the tymes 1

4 The frowarde nacion and advoutrous
seketh a sygne ; there shall nonother
sygne be geven vnto them, but the sygne
off the prophet Jonas. So lefte he them,
and departed.

5 And when his disciples were come to
the other side of the water, they had
forgotten to take breed with them.

6 Then Jesus sayd vnto them. Take
hede, and beware of the leven of the
Pharises and of the Saduces.

7 They thought a monge them selves,
sayinge, We have brought no breed with
vs.

8 When Jesus vnderstode that, he sayd
vnto them, O ye of lytell fayth, why
are youre mindes cumbred because ye
have brought no breed 1

9 Do ye not yet perceave, nether re-
member those V lovesse when there were
V M. men, and howe many baskettes toke
ye vp 1

10 Nether the vij loves when there
were iv M. and howe many baskettes
toke ye vppe ?

Why perceave ye not then, that Y
spake not vnto you of breed when I
sayde, Beware off the leven of the Pha-
rises and of the Saduces ?

1

12 Then vnderstode they, howe that
he bad not them beware of the leven of
breed, butt of the doctryne of the Pha-
rises and of the Saduces.

13 When Jesus cam in to the coostcs
of the cite which is called Ccsarea Phi-
lippi, he axed hys disciples, sayinge,
Whom do men saye that I the sonne of
man am ?

14 They saidc, Some saye that thou
arte Jhon Baptist ; some Helyas ; some
Jercmiivs, or won of the prophctcs.

15 He soyde vnto them, lint whom

saye ye that I am 1

16 »Synu)n Peter juiswored and s:iy<lo,
Thou arte Crist, the sonne of the livynge
God.

17 And Jesus answered and sayde to

ti 2

S4

OOTHIC, 360.

9

ANGLO-SAXON, 995

[St. Matt.

Etttlij; cart till, Simon culfran beam ;
foi-dain hit de ne onwreah flse-sc nc blotl,
ac m;n fanler de on heofenum ys.

18 And ic secge de, dH?t du eart Petrus,

and ofer disne stan ic
c}Ticean,and hellc gatu ne n^'gou oiig;^;!!
da,

tinibri'^'c n '

•

And de ic sylle lieofona rict-s ciC

1

and 8wa hwtt't swa du ofcr eMr|^aii ^. -
bindst, dat \ty\» on hcofonum ^ebiinden ;
and swa hwa?t swil du unbindiit ofer
corjmn, dsct by|> unbundcn on hcofonum.

20 Da behead se Hiclend lip leorning-
cnilituMi, dat lii^ namini nu-nn ncsicdon,
dffit he waTC Hai'lcnd Crist.

21 Syddan he ongan awutelian hya
Icorning-cuihtuni, da>t he woMo faran to
Hienisalcm, and fela jjinjja |H)lian fnim
yldrum, and Ijocerum, and eaUlor man-
uuni da'ra aacerda ; and bcon ofslcgcn,
and dy |'r}ddan dage arisan.

22 And da genara Petrus hyne on-sun-
dron, and cwa»}» to him, Drilitcn, ne
gewurda da^t.

23 Da beseah he liync. and c\v.i|> to
Pet re, Qang ba?flan nie. Satunas ; wdir-
nrde dii eart me ; ft)rduni dii niUt da
)>ing de synd Codes, ac da de synt
manna. ^

24 Da sapdc 8C Hselend hys leoming-
cniiitum, G)'f hwa wylle fyligcan me,
«' sylfne, and nyme hys rode,
\v" *

'

ui

,;e

;

2«; So|>lice se de w}le h}*s sawie halo
ills R"*^ ^^ ^^ ^*}lc
i», se hig fiut.

gcdon. he li-
hig for me K; ,.

26 Hwa^t frcma)>

1 menn. deah
iiTne. ^'vf he
he ealne mitldan t.».-.
h>"» wlwle fnrw\rd [-olalW wltlo hwylc
gewrixl 8yl|» se maun for hys suwlc 1

;^.

27 Witodlicc manno« sunu ys to cum-
eune on hys faxlcr wuldre, mid h\s
nn«l doiino a;;ylt wghwylcum be
r

'

l.^. .

.-^- -lum weorcr.*

28 S«j|dice ic secge cow, sumc synt licr
standcude, de dea)> ne 0Db}Tigea|>, wr

1

;

s

9

;

XVL 18-2S.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
to hym, Blessid art thou, Symon Bar-
iona ;* for flesh and blood shewide nat
to thee, but my fadir that is in heuenes.

18 And Y seye to thee, for thou art
Petre, and vpon this stoon I shal bilde
my churche, and the 5atis of helle shuleu
nat han mi^t"*" a^eins it.

19 And to thee I shal 5eue the keies
of the kyngdam of heuenes ; and what
euer thou shalt bynde vpon erthe, shal
be bounden and in heuenes ; and what
euer thou shalt vnbynde vpon erthe, shal
be vnbounden and in heuenes.

20 Thanne he comaundide to his dis-
ciplis, that thei shulden seie to no man,
that he was Crist.

2

Fro that tyme Jhesus bygan for to
shewe to his disciplis, that it byhouith
hym to go to Jerusalem, and sufFre
many thiugus of the eldris. and scribis,
and princis of prestis ; and be sleyn, and
the thridde day ryse vp a3ein.

22 And Petre, takynge hym to, began
for to blame hym, seyinge, Fer be it fro
thee, Lord ; this thing shal not be to
thee.

23 The whiche, turnyd, seide to Petre,
Sathanas, go after me; thou art sclaundre
to rae ; for thou sauerist nat^ tho thing!
that ben of God, but tho thingis that
ben of men.

24 Thanne Jhesus seide to his disciplis,
3if eny man wole cume after me, denye
he hym self, and take his crosse, and
sue me

25 For he that wole make his soule
gaaf,^ shal Jcse it ; forsothe he that shal
lese his soulc^ for me, shal fynde it.

26 Sothely wliat profitith it to a man,
jif he Wynne al the world, trewly he
suffre peyrynge of his soule 1 or what
oliaungyngc shal a man 3euc for his
soule?

27 For mannes Bonc is to come in
glorie of l)is fadir, with his angclis, and
thanne lie shal 3eldc to cuery man aftir
his work is.

28 Trculy I

Bummc of

seie to 30U, there ben
?/Jc/i stondyngc hcer, the

TYNDALE, 1526.

85

him, Happy arte thou, Simon the soune
for fleshe and bloud have
of Jonas ;
nott opened vnto the that, butt my father
which is in heven.

18 And I saye also vnto the, that thou
arte Peter, and apon this roocke I wyll
bylde my congregacion, and the gates
off hell shall nott prevayle a geynst it.

1

And I wyll geve vnto the the keyes
of the kyngdom of heven ; and whatso-
ever thou byndest vppon erth, yt shall be
bounde in heven ; and whatsoever thou
lowsest on erthe, yt shalbe lowsed in
heven.

20 Then he charged his disciples, that
they shulde tell no man, that he was
Jesus Christ.

21 From that tyme forth Jesus began
to shewe vnto hys disciples, howe that
he must go vnto Jerusalem, and suffer
many thinges of the seniores, and of the
hye prestes, and of the scribes ; and
must be killed, and ryse agayne the
thirde daye.

22 Peter toke him a side, and began
to rebuke hym, sayinge, Master, faver
thy sylfe ; this shall not come vnto the.

23 Then tourned he aboute, and sayde
vnto Peter, Go after me, Satan ; thou
offendest me ; because thou perceavest
nott godly thynges, but worldly thinges.

24 Jesus then sayde to hys disci j)lcs,
Yf eny man wyll folowe me, leet hym
forsayke hym sylfe, and take hys crosse,
and folowe me

25 For who soever wyll save hys lyfe,
shall loose yt ; and whosoever shall loose
hys lyfe for my sake, shall fynde yt.

26 Whatt shall hit ])roffet a man, yf he
shulde wyn all the whoole worldc, so ho
loose hys owne soule 1 or els what shall
a man geve to rcdeme hys soule agayne
witli all 1

27 For the sonne off man shall come
in the glory of hys father, with hys
angels, and then shall he rewarde cveiy
man accordinge to hys dcdes.

28 Verely 1 saye vnto you, some there
be u mongc them that here stomle,

86

GOTUIC, 360.

^

!

ANULO-SAXON, 995. [St. Matt.

liig jrescon manncs sunu cumcudiic ou
hya fknier rice.

Chap. XVII. i And aefter six ilnfrum
n,

nnm sc Ila-leml Petnim. aiul T
aiul lohannem, liys l>ro(1or, a;
h\^ on-8uiulron on wnnc henhnc niunt,

10

'

2 And be waa gehiwod ^

bini.
anncj
And his ansyn scean swu ., ...
and hys reaf wacron swa hwlte swa
snaw.

3 And cfne! da letywdc Mo, ^^o .aid
llcliaa, mid liini sprocendc.

4 Da c\vn'|> Petrus to iiiin. Drihton. pod
ys us her to beonne. Gyf ilii \s\h, uton
wyrccan her J»reo eardung-stuwa ; do
anc, Moyse aue, and Utlic ane.

5 II im da pyt sprcccnihim, and so|»licc

da be<»rht wolcn hip nft-rscean ; and d;i
efnc ! com stcfn t»f dam wolcne. and cwa'|>,
Her y(J min leofa sunu, on dam mc wel-
gchca|> ; gehyra|> hync.

6 And dii hip dis pehyrdon hys U^orn-
inp-cnihtiis, iiip feoHon on hyra aiisyne,
and hym swyde ondre«lon.

7 Ho poncalwhte dii, and hip nt linln,
Arisii}>. and ne on-

and him to cw;. !<,
dra'(h»|) cow.

8 Dii hip hyirt capan 1;

gcsawon hig naMin-
Hylfne.

l.iit. 1

no
nd

9 And da liip »>f «lam nmuli t*--
HirhMul hym hchcad, an»l dus os.i,,
Nanum monn no socpoan pe di», wr
maimes sunu of dea[)G arise.

10 And da axoth^n hya Icominp-cnihtaa
hyne. Hi*-R't »ocpca|> da USceraa. da«t gc-
bvi

• -^t cuman 11
.. ..nib^'anKlc ;

11

1. WiUnlh'co
Hflias >i toweanl, and he gc-ahuwa|»

i

li .,,..vc ic oow sccge, dat Hchaa
com, and hip hyne ne gecneowon, ac hii;
dydon ymW liyno. swa hwa^t swa hit;
v^ manner sunu e^ic
wohhm ;
r-
fnun him t

;»nc.

-

'

I

I

2

1

XVII. 1-12.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYJSTDALE, 1526.

87

whiche sbul nat taaste deth, til thei
seen mannys sone cummynge in his
kyngdom.

whych shall nott taste of deeth, tyll
they shall have sene the sonne of man
come in hys kyngdome.

i And after

Chap. XVII.

sexe
dayes Jhesus toke Petre, and Jamys,
and Joon, his brother, and ledde hem
asydis in to an hi^ hill,

2 And was transfiooired''' bifore hem.
And his face schoon as the sunne ; for-
sothe his clothis were maad white as
snow.

3 And lo ! Moyses and Helye apperiden

to hem, spekynge with hym.

4 Sothely Petre answerynge seid to
Jhesu, Lord, it is good vs to be here.
3 if thou wolt, make we here three taber-
naclis ; to thee oon, to Moyses oon, and
con to Helie.
5 3it hym spekynge, loo ! a li5ty cloude
shadewid hem j and loo ! a vois of the
cloude, seyinge, This is my derworth
Bone, in whom I haue wel pleside to
me ; heere ^e hym.

6 And the disciplis, heerynge, fellen
doun in to her facis, and dredden gretely.

7 And Jhesus came ni3, and touchide
hem, and seide to hem, Ris vp, nyl 36
dreede.

Chap. XVII.

i And affer vj dayes
Jhesus toke Peter, and James, and Jhon,
hys brother, and brought them vppe
into an hye mountayne out of the waye,
2 And was transfygured before them.
And hys face dyd shyne as the sun ; and
hys clothes were as whyte as the light.

3 And beholde ! there appered vnto
them Moses and Helyas, talkinge with
him.

4 Then answered Peter and sayde to
Jesus, Master, here is good beinge for
Yff thou wylt, leet vs make here iij
vs.
tabernacles ; won for the, and won for
Moses, and won for Helyas.

5 Whyll he yet spake, beholde ! a bright
cloude shadowed them ; and lo ! a voice
out of the cloude sayde, This is my deare
Sonne, in whon I delite j heare hym.

6 And when the disciples herde that,
they fell flatt on there faces, and were
soore afrayed.

7 And Jesus cam, and touched them,

and sayde, Aryse, and be not a frayed.

8 Forsothe thei, rysynge vp her ei3en,

8 Then lyfte they vppe their eyes, and

sawen no man, no but Jhesus aloon.

sawe no man, but Jesus only.

9 And, hem cummynge doun fro the
comauudide hem,
mounteyn,
seyinge, Saie 36 to no man the visioun,
til mannes sone ryse a3ein fro dead.

Jhesus

10 And his disciplis axiden hym, sey-
inge, What tlierfore seyn scribis, that it
behoueth llely first come?

11 And lie answerynge seith to hem,
Forsothe Ilely is to come, and he shul
restore ulle tliingis.

1

Trc'uly V seyc to 30U, that llcly is
now coinen, and thei kncwcn hym nut,
Initthoi didc-n in liyrn, wliat euerc thingis
the! wolchjn ; ho and niuunys sone is to
tuffrc of hem.

9 And as they cam dounc from the
mountayne, he charged them, sayinge,
Se that ye shewe thys vysion to no man,
tyll the Sonne of man be rysen agcync
from deeth.

10 And hys disciples axed off him,
sayinge. Why then sayc the scribes^ that
llelias muste fyrst come 1

1

Jesus answered and sayd vnto them,
llelias shall fyrst come, and restore all
thyngcs.

12 And I saye vnto you, that llelias
ys come alrcdy, and they knewc hym
nott, l)utt have done vnto him, whatso-
ever they lusted ; in lykc wyse shall also
the Sonne of man suflfrc of them.

88

GOTHIC, 360.

6

'

ANGLO-SAXON, 995. [St. Matt.
13 Da onpcton h}*8 lcominj!r-cnihtii««,
dR't he hyt siiMle he lohanne dmii FuU-
ulitere.^

14 And d' '

tu (Inro mrnfj.'ii,

him to ^cii.
cneowum toforan him, and cwfc|>.

, Mi.'iiin, ;;. i-ij^ttlum

If) I^'"
nm (1c 1
he fyl)) on fyr, and gelomlicc on water.

.... y,, .

..foKl-

!u|>, ofl

^

J

.

1

And ic hrohtc hyne to dinum leorn-
inj;-cnihtum, and hig ne mihtou hync
gehjchin.

17 Du andswarode he l»im. Kali pc
ungcleaffulle and pwyre encores ; hii lange
heo ie raid eow ? hu lange forberc ic
cow 1 BriDga)> h)iie to me hidcr.

18 And da |)rcade se Haelend hvne, and
'rt ; and se cnapa waa

8c dcofol li\

"

of da*rc tiuL _

.. cd.

19 Da genealaehton hys leornin^-enihtas
him to, and him to cwa'don «h*:;lice, liwi
ne myhte we hyne ut-adnfnn I

20 Da cwa?|) lie, For hyra ungcleafful-
S6|»lice on eoniost ic eow secjjc,

nessc.
gyf ge hr.
corn, and u
Far heononc, doune ferde he ; and cow
ne by|> wnig |>ing unmihtelic;

. Bwa -
lissum i

'•'

""

'

21 S<')['lit'c d'lH cynn ne hy\> ut-adnfen,

hiiton I'urh gcl>ed ami fasten.
22 Da hig wune<h»n on Galilea, da
cw.v|> 8C Ila'lcnd, Mannes sunu }-8 to
syllenne on manna handa ;

93 And hig ofRlea|> hyne, and he ar'st
' Da wunlun hig

r "

'

on dum I
|>carle gc-m

24 And da he com to Cafamnum. da
1 nnm-
..tow DC

n to r.tre. ^
w cwafdou,

-

g}lt he gafol I

25 Da cvrw]t he. Oyse he d(*|>. And

dii he com into danj '
Hwlcnd, Hwaet |>inc|i
hwam nima|> cyninj^nia gafol oddo toll ?
of liyra beamum, hwieder de of frem-
cdum I

*' —

26 Da cwn>)) he. Of freme<lunL

Da

1

;

;

;

8
6

;

XVIL 13-26.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

89

13 TLanne disciplis vndirstoden, that

13 Then hys disciples perceaved, that

of Joon Baptist he hadde seid to hem.

he spake vnto them of Jhon Baptist.

14 And whanne he cam to the cmn-
panye of peple, a man cam to hym,
foldid on knees byfore hym, seymge,
. 1 5 Lord, haue mercy on my sone ; for
he is lunatyke, and suffrith yuel, for why
oft tymys he fallith in to the fijr, and
oft tymys in to water.

16 And I offride hym to thi disciplis,

14 And when they were come to the
people, ther cam to hym a certayne
man, and kneled doune to hym, saynge,
15 Master, have mercy on my sonne ;
ffor he is franticke, and ys sore vexed,
and oft tymes falleth into the fyre, and
oft into the water.

1

And I brought him to thy disciples,

and thei my3ten nat hele hym.

and they coulde not heale him.

17 Jhesus answerynge seith, A ! thou
generacioun vnbyleeful, "• and weiward
hou longe shal I be with 50U 1 hou
longe shal I suffre 30U 1 Brynge ^ee hym
hidir to me.

18 And Jhesus blamyde hym, and the
deuel wente out fro hym ; and the child
is helid fro that houre.

19 Thanne disciplis camen ni^ to Jhesu
priuyly, and seiden to hym, Whi mi3te
nat we casten hym out ?

20 Jhesus seith to hem, For 5oure
Treuly I seie to 50U, 5if ^e
vnbyleue.
shulen haue feith, as a corn of seneuey,
50 shulen seie to this hill, Passe thou
hennus, and it shal passe; and no thing
shal be impossible to 30U

17 Jesus answered and sayde,

!

generacion faythles, and croked ; howe
longe shall I be with you? how longe
shall Y suffre you 1
Bryng him bidder
to me.

1

And Jhesus rebuked the devyll, and
he cam out; and the child was healed
even that same houre.

19 Then came hys disciples secretly,
and sayde, Why could not we cast him
out?

20 Jesus sayd vnto them, Because off
For I saye veryly vnto
youre vnbelfe.
you, yfF ye had faythe, as a grayne off
musterd seed, ye shuld saye vnto this
mountayne, Eemeve hence to yonder
place, and he shulde remeve ; nether
shuld eny thynge be vnpossyble for you
to do

2

Forsothe this kynde is nat cast out,

21 But this kynde goeth not oute,

no but by preyinge and fastynge.

butt by pryer and fastynge.

22 Treuly, hem lyuynge togidre

in
Galilee, Jhesus seide to hem, Mannes
sone is to be bitraied in to the hondis
of men

23 And thei shulen slea hym, and the
thridde day he shal ryse a3ein. And
thei ben maad ful sory.

24 And whanne he came to Caphar-
naum, thei that token tribut, camen to
Petre, and seiden to hym, 3oure maister
payeth nat tribute 1

25 And he seith, 3he. And whcnne
he had cntrid in to an house, Jlio.sus
came bifore hym, seyinge, Symount,
Of whiclie taken
what semcth to thee 1
the kyngis of crthc tribut?^ of her owne
flonys, ether of ulyenys ]

^

26 And he seide, Of other menniis

22 Whill they passed the tyme in
Galile, Jesus sayde vnto them, The
Sonne off man shalbe betrayed into the
hondes off men ;

23 And they shall kill hym, and the
thyrd daye he shall ryse agayne. And
they sorowed greatly.

24 When they were come to Caper-
naum, they that were wont to gadre
poll money, cam to Peter, and sayde,
Doth youre master paye tribute 1

25 He sayd. Ye.

And when he was
come into tlie houssc, Jesus s])akc fyrst
to hym, sayng, What thynkcst thou Si-
Of whome do the kynges off the
mon 1
crth take tiibute, or ])<)1] money? of
their chyldren, or of straungcrs ?

2 6 Peter sayde vnto hynie, Of straungers.

90

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. ^rA-rr.

cwe|> he, Eornostlicc da beam synt
frige.

unn''

27 Dcftli-hwajderc diet wc In ne gc-
. pan^' to da?rc mu, nn<l vmryt
lit, and nim dune airestan
diniic
fisc ; and, hys niu|> ge-opena, dii fintst
spiinc weeg on him ; iiim done, and sylo
for mc and for de.

....^; 1

Chap. X^^II.^

1 On drrre tide gc-
ncalachton hys leoniin;^-cnililas to dam
llaclende, and cwiedon, Hwa, wcust dii,
ys yldra on heofena rice 1

2 And da clypode se Ilirlend trnne

lytling, and gesotte on hyra niitlKn ;
3 And cw»|>, S6|)h*ce
buton ge boon gecyrredc. an<l
cne 8wa swa lytlinLT.'i-''. ne ga gt
cna rice.

ic secgc eow,

''d-

.f-

i

4 Swa hwylc sw'x ll^Ile go-en"'
dc8 lytling, se y^ m ii.i in lnu'

5 And 8wa hwylc bwil anne dilicne
lytling on minum naman oufeli}>. se on*
feh}> me.

6 S6|>licc 80 de bc8wic|> a»nne of d^-ssum
lytlingum, do on me pelyfa|>, botoro him
ys da't an cwyrn-stan si to hys Hwynin
geonytt, and si besenced on sa's griind.

7 Wad}*sum middan-geardc, j'urh suic-
doinas ; mo^mI yR, dn't Hwycdoma.H ouinon
tUah hwrt'di-re wa dam m. im Jc swyc-
dom jnirh hyne c^ttiI*.

;

8 Oyf din liand odde din fot do s^-icaj*,
•oeorf hync of, and awiir]) fram do.
IJctero dc ys da't dii pii wanlrnl. tnlde
hoalt, to h'fo, donne dii !
da
and twogon fet and sy «

1.

*

^

'

'

'

9 And g}f din rage dc swici^, ahola
hyt ut, and awurp hj't fram dc.
Botorc
do ys mitl linum oage on life to gamio,
d«>nnc dii bi mid twam ascnd on hcllc

;
;

XVII. 27.-XVIII. 9-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

91

sonys.
sonys ben free.

Jhesus seide to hym, Therfore

27 Forsothe that we sclaundre nat
hem, go thou to the see, and sende an
hoke, and take the ilke fishe that first
cummeth vp ; and, his mouth openyd,
thou shalt fynde stater ;'^ thou takyng
it, 3eue to hem for me and for thee.

Then sayd Jesus vnto hym agane, Then
are the chyldren fre.

27 Neverthelesse lest we shulde of-
fende them, goo to the see, and cast in
thyne angle, and take the fysshe that
fyrst cometh vp; and, when thou hast
opened his mouthe, thou shalt fynde a
pece of twelve pens ; that take and paye
for me and the.

Chap. XVIII.

i In that hour the
disciplis camen ni^ to Jhesus, seiynge,
Who, gessist thou, is more in the kyng-
dam of heuenes 1

2 And Jhesus, clepynge to a litil child,

putte hym in the mydil of hem ;

3 And seide, I seie trewthe to 50U, no
but ^if 5e shulen be turnyd, and maad
as litil children, ^e shulen nat entren
in to the kyngdam of heuenes.

4 Therfore who euere shal meeke
hym as this litil child, he is more in
the kyngdam of heuenes.

5 And he that resceyueth oon siche

litil in my name, resceyueth me.

ChAp. XVITI.

I The same tyme the
disciples cam vnto Jesus, sayng, Who is
the greatest in the kyngdom off heven 1

2 Jesus called a chylde vnto hym, and

set hym in the middes of them;

3 And sayd, Verely I say vnto you,
except ye tourne, and become as chil-
dren, ye cannot enter into the kyngdom
off heven.

4 Whosoever therfore shall submit him
silfe as this chylde, he is the greatest in
the kyngdom of heven.

5 And whosoever receaveth suche a
chylde in my name, receaveth me.

6 Forsothe who shal sclaundre oon of
these smale lestc, that byleeuen in me,
it spedith to hym that a myln stoon
of assis be hanged in his neeke, and
be drenchid in to 'the depnesse of the

6 But whosoever offend won of these
lytell wons, which beleve in me, yt were
better for hym that a millstone were
hanged aboute his necke, and that he
were drouned in the depth of the see.

see.

7 Woo to the world, for sclaundris
treuly it is neede, that sclaundris come
netheles woo to the ilk man by whom a
sclaundre cometh.

8 Forsothe 5if thin bond or thi foot
scluundrc thee, kitt it of, and kast awey
It is good to thee to entre in
fro thee.
to lyf feble, other croked, than hauynge
two bond is or two feet to bo sent in to
euerlastyngc fijr.

9 And 3if thin ei3e sclaundre thee,
pulle it out, and cast awey fro thee.
It
is good to tht^c with oon ci30 to entre
in to lyf, than liauyngc two ei3cn to be
sentc in to fijr of belle.

7 Wo be vnto the world, because of
hit is necessary, that
evill occasions ;
evyll occasions be geven ; neverthclcsse
woo be to that man by whom evyll
occasion commeth.

8 Wherefore yff thy honde or thy fotc
geve the an occasion of evyll, cut hym
of, and cast hym from the.
Hit is
better for the to enter into lyfe halt, or
maymcd, rather then thou shuldesto
havyngc two hondcs or two fete be cast
into evcrlustyng fyre.

9 And yf also thyne eye offendc the,
plucke him outc, and caste hym from
It is better for the to enter into
tlu;.
lyfe with one eye, then havyng two eyes
to be cast into hell fyre.

92

GOTHIC, 360.

8

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
10 u arum'
of d;6um 1^1 ^

^

[St. Matt.

' e

,

,

1 1 Sol^Hcc mannes sunu com to gelijcl-

anne dat forwcarj).

I 2 HwiDt }'s cow gejjubt ?

Gyf hwylc
mann lia;f|> huntl Hcoapa, and liiiii losa|>
an of duni, hu ne forlsrt he da nigon and
on dam niunliini. and
hinid ui
.>t an de f»»nvrarj> ?

ga'j> aii<l

*'

13 And gyf hyt

hyt
fint, sojjHcc ic cow .s;
_, . .^.d lie .-^uv lor
gcbli.ssa|» for dam anum donnc ofer da
nit^'on and hund nigontig de ua ne I06-
edon.

(!;• t

1..

14 Swa ny*8 willa

eownira
fa?(ler de on heofenum ys, diet an for-
wnrdo of disuni '

befornn

*''

*

15 iS6})lice gM

r 8}-nga|> wid
de, ga^and ntyr him, betwux deand him
de gehyrj), dii ge«ta|)cl-
Bvlfuin :

'

'

nst diiiii

I-

16 CJyf he tie ne gtl»yr|>, nim donne
gyt ncnne (nlde twegen to di*. d:i*t a'lc
word stande on twegra oildc JMvora
gewittnysse.

17 (Jyf he big ne gthyr|>. jwi^t liyt
(lyf he hi;; no u''h\r|'.

gefi'medene.
81 he dc 8\va swa hicden and nnuifuli.

1

So|)nee ic sccgc cow, swa hwylcc
8WJ1 pe gebinda)» ofer eor|»an, da l>oo|»
ne on heofonum ; nnd swii liwyl-
^0 ofer eor}^an unbiudu)i, da be*>|>

ti
on heofonum unbiindenc.

19 Eft ic cow sccgc, jr}*f twegen of
cow ge|iwa*rin|i ofer eor)mn. Ik* a-Knim
|>inge de big Itidda)*, bit gewnr[> him of
minum foxier dc on heofonum y.^.

20 Dkf twcgcn odde |>ry gynt on min-
gcgadcrotle, Atcr ic com on

um '
hyra

111'.

a I Da genealicbtc Petnw to him. nnd
cwa^|>. Drihten. g}f min brtnlor pyii::aji
wid me, mot ic him forgjfani Od 8e«»f«tn
ndost

;

4
2

XVIII. IO-2I.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

93

10 Se 56, that 56 dispise nat oon of
Trewly I seie to 50U, that
these litile.
the angelis of hem in heuenes seen euer-
more the face of my fadir that is in
heuenes.

11 Forsothe mannys sone came for to

10 Se, that ye despise not won of these
For I saye vnto you, thatt
litell wons.
in heven their angels behold the face of
my fader which ys in heven.

11 Ye and the sonne of man is come

saue that thing that perishide.
12 What semeth to 50U ?

3^'f ther
weren to summan an hundrid sheep,
and oon of hem shall erre, wher he shal
nat leeue nynty and nyne in desert,
and shal go for to seeke
that
erride "?

that

to save that which is lost.

1

How thynke jel Yf a man had an
hondred shepe, and one of them shuld
goo astray, will he not leve nynty and
nyne in the mountains, and go and seke
that won which is gone astray 1

13 And if it befalle that he fynde it,
trewly I seie to 30U, for he shal ioye
theron more than of nynty and nyne
that erriden nat.

13 If it happen that he fynd him,
veryly I say vnto you, he reioyseth
more of that shepe then of the nynty
and nyne which went not astray.

14 So it is nat will before youre fadir
that is in heuenes, that oon of these litil

• perishe.

15 Forsoth ^if thi brother shal synne
in thee, go thou, and reproue hym,"*"
bitwixe thee and hym aloone ;
3if he
shal heere thee, thou hast wonnen thi
brother.

16 Trewly ^if he shal nat heere thee,
take with thee oon or two, that euery
word stonde in the mouthe of two or
three witncssis.

17 That 3if he shal nat heere hem,
Forsothe ^if
seie thou to the chirche.
he shal not heere the chirche, be hee to
thee as an hethen and a puplicane.

18 I seie to 30U trewli, what euere
thingis 3ee shulen bynde vpon erthe,
tho shulen be bounden and in heuenes
and what euere thingis 3ee shulen vn-
bynde vpon erthe, tho shulen be vn-
bounden and in heuenes.

19 Eftsoone I seie to 30U, that 3if two
of 30U shulen consente on the erthe, of
euery tliinge wliateuer thei sliulcn axe,
it slial be don to hem of my fadir that
is in heuenes.

20 For where two or three shulen be
gedrid in my name, ther I am in the
midil of hem.

21 Tliannc Petrc, cummyngc 1113 to
hym, seide. Lord, hou oftc slial my
brother synne in me, and 1 shal for3euc

... „,.-,„,

1

1

Even so hit is nott the wyll of youre
father in heuen, that won off this lytell
wons shulde perishe.

15 Moreover yf thy brother trespas
ayenst the, go, and tell hym his faute,
betwene hym and the alone ;
yf he
heare the, thou hast wone thy brother.

J 6 But yf he heare the not, then take
with the won or two, that in the mouth
of two or thre witnesses all sainges maye
stonde.

17 Yf he heare not them, tell hit vnto
Yf he heare not the
the congregacion.
congregacion, take him as an hethen
man and as a publican.

18 Verely I say vnto you, whatsoever
ye bynde on erth, shalbe bounde in
heven ; and whatsoever ye lose on erth,
shalbe losed in heven.

19 Agayn I say vnto you, that if two
off you shall agre in ertli, in eny maner
tliinge whatsoever they shall desyrc, hit
Khall)c gcven them of my fader which is
in heven.

20 For where two or thre arc gadcred
togodder in my name, there am I in tho
myddcs off them.

21 Then cam IVtof

to hym, and
Hayde, Master, howc oftc shall my brother
trcHpas agcynst me, and I shall foryevo
liym 1 Shall I forgcve hym seven tymcsl

94

GOTUIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
22 Da cw!P|» Be Hapleml, No socgc ic
dc, od seofon Kulas ; uc od soofun huml

[St. Matt.

23 ,

II VH heofona rice anlic dam

cyningCt de hys )>eowa« gcrailegtKle.

24 And da lie da-t pcrail Bottc. Iiim
wes an broht, bc him sceoldc tj-n |»uHend
punda.

25 And da he nirfde h^^-nnon he h>-t
a;:uldo, hjTic hct h}-8 hliifonl gmllan,
and hys wif, and hys odd, and eall dji-t
he alite

26 Da astrehteae |^ow h}-ne, and cw«»|»,
HIaford, gehafa ge|»yKl on me, and ic
hyt dc eall agylde.

27 Da jreniTltBodc se hlafortl him, and

forgeaf him done gy\t.

28 Da se ^wa ut-eo<le, he pemetU'
live ofen-ht^owan, se him scooMc iiii hund
])onrtni ; and he nam hyne da, and for-
|iry.smcdo hyne, and cwr»|», Ag}-f dwt dii
me scealt.

20 And dii

iistrehte hys efon-|>eowa
hyne and Iwd hyne, and du.s ewn'|»,
Oe|>yldojja, and ie hyt de eall rigyfe.

30 He da nolde ; ae frnle, and wenrp
hyne on rwcartern. (x1 da»t he him call
agefe.

31 Da msiiwun
da wurdon h'xi*
And eomon, and swdon hyra hUiforde
eallc da dsetlc,

_

.

33 Da eljixHlc hys hlafonl h}Tie. and
cwir|> to him, Ealn dii lylra
|»on\va,
edlne dinne gj'lt ie de forgeaf, fv»n1am
de dii me l»RHle.
,33 Hu nc geh>Tcde dc pemilt^nian
dinum efen-|HH>wan, Bwa swa ic do
gemill80<le ?

34 Da wir« Be hlafonl jTre, and sealdc
hyne dam witnenim, cx1
da?t he eall
agttlde.

^j; Swa def» min se hcofunlica fabler,
gjf gc of e<^wnim hcortum eownun
lirv'jdrum nc forgyfa|».

1

1

XVIIL 22-35.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

95

22 Jhesus seith to hym, T seie nat to
thee, til seuen sithis; but to seuenty
sjthis seuene sithis.

23 Therfore the kingdom of heuenes
is lickened to a man kyng, that wolde
putte resoun with his seruauntis.

24 And whanne he began for to putte
resoun, oon was offrid to hym, that
ow^te to hym ten thousand talentis.

25 Trewly whanne he hadde nat wher-
of to 5elde, his lord comaundide hym to
be sold, and his wif, and sonys, and alle
thingis that he hadde, and to be payed.
26 Forsothe the ilk seruaunt, fallynge
doun, preide hym, seyinge, Haue pa-
cience in me, and alle thingis I shal
^eelde to thee.

27 Sothely the lord of that seruaunt
hsiujnge mercy, leete hym,"*" and for5aue
to hym the dette.

28 Trewly thilk seruaunt gon out,
fonde oon of his euen seruauntis, that
ou3te hym an hundrid pens ; and he,
holdynge hym, stranglide hym, seyinge,
3eld that thou owist.

2 9 And his euen seruaunt preiede hym,
seyinge, Haue pacience in me, and alle
thingis I shal quyte to thee.

30 Forsothe he wolde nat ; but wente,
and sent hym in to pryson, til that he
paide al the dette.

3

that weren don,

Sothely his euen seruauntis, seeynge
the thingis
gixtely
hadden sorowe. And thei camen, and
tolden to her lord alle the thingis that
weren don.

32 Tlianne his lord clepide hym, and
to hym, Weyward seruaunt, I
al the dette, for thou

seide
for3af to tliee
preidist me.

33 Tlierfore wher it behouede nat
and tlicc to haue mercy on thi euen
seruaunt, as I hadde mercy of tliee ?

34 And his lord wroth, tok hym to
tourmenturs, til that he paicde al the
dette.
35 So and my fadir of heucn shal do
to 50U, 5if 3c for3cue nat cucry man to
his brother, of 3oure hcrtis.

22 Jesus sayd vnto hym, I saye nott
vnto the, seven tymes ; but seventy
tymes seven tymes.

23 Therefore is the kyngdom off heven
lykened vnto a certayne kynge, which
wolde take a countes of his servauntes.

24 And when he had begune to recken,
won was browghte vnto hym, whiche
ought hym ten thousande talenttes.

25 But when he had nought to paye,
the lord commaunded him to be solde,
and his wyfe, and his children, and all
that he had, and payment to be made.

26 The servaunt fell doune, and be-
sought hym, sainge, Syr, yeve me re-
spyte, and I vyll paye hit every whit.

27 Then had the lorde pitie on the
servaunt, and lowsed hym, and forgave
hym the dett.

28 The same servaunt went out, and
founde wone off his felowes, which ought
hym an hundred pence ; and leyed
hondes on hym, and toke hym by the
throote, sainge, Paye that thou owest.

29 And his felowe fell doune and
besought hym, saynge. Have pacience
with me, and I wyll paye the all.
^30 And he wollde not ; but went, and
cast hym into preson, tyll he shulde
paye the dett.

3

When his other felowes sawe what
was done, they were very sory. And
cam, and tolde vnto there lorde all that
had happened.

32 Then the lorde called him, and
sayde vnto hym, O evyll servaunt, Y
forerave the all that dett, because thou
praydest me.

33 Was it not mete also that thou
slmldest have had compassion on thy
folow, even as Y had pitie on the?
34 And his lorde was wrooth, and
dclyvered hym to the ioylcrs, tyll lie
shulde paye all tluit was duo to hym.

35 So lyke wysc shall yourc hevenly
father do vnto you, yf ye wyll not forgevo
with yourc hcrttcs, cache won to his
brother there treaspases.

S6

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

2

Chap. XIX.

i And da se ILxUnd
gc-cndude das sprseca, he fcrdc fram
and com on ludciscc cndas
(' ''

]>•

i.in lurdaiien.

3 Antl hym fyli^don mycele m.inogu,

'

'

and ]
3 \'

'

_

(\g^Y.
him to Farisipi, h}-ne
costnij,'ende, and cwacdon, Is rilyfrd sen-
e^aim mcnn hys wif to forlvtcmie, for
a-uej^oim ['inj^c 1

4 Dh andswarodc he him, Ne ra*dde
go, 80 de on fruman worhte, he worhte
\\'a?p-mann and wif-maun ?

5 And cwa?|>, Fonlnm so mann forlsett
fanler and niodor, and hyne to
hys
wife ge|)eot; and bco|) twcgcu on unuui
llcCSCC.

6 Witodllce nc sj-nt 1

Nc gctwajmc h— .

fla'sc.
God gcsonmodc.

'on, ac an
...-:iu da de

7 Da cwit''^
pyllan hiw _
Iscton ?

^ii^, Hwi hut Moyso*,
hoc, and hig for-

^

8 Da cwne|) he, Moysea, for cower hc-
ortan ht ardncsse, lyfde cow cower wif to
forlatcune ; soj^lice uses h}'t on fr}-m|)^
8wa.

9 S6|iHce ic secge eow, swa hwa swi
forlirtt hys wif, hiiton f»)r forH;:«'rc. imd
odtr tcta|», so unryht-ha'mj) ; and sc do
forltrtene after him uym)\ se uuriht-
ha*m|>.

10 Da cwKdon h\^ Iconiing-cnihtas,
Gyf hyt 8wa ys dam menn mid h}-8 wife,
nc froniajj minum mcnn t<»
he, Nc »;

p eallo
mcnn dis word ; ac dam de hyt gcseahl

11 Da cwR»[>

ic.

:

1

S6|»Hcc aynd l>cli8tnode, de of h}Ta
modor innixtum cuma|> ; and eft synd

^

•

;

\ men de mun Im

'

^,..A iH'listnmlc,] de l»i;,

hcli.stnodon. for heofiena rice.
uyme se, de undeniymau ma?gc.

-. ..o
Undcr-

13 Da wa'ron him gebrohtc hilinj^aa
to, da't he h}*8 hand on hig aacttc, and

1

;

1

XIX. I-I3.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

Chap. XIX. i And it is don, whenne
Jhesus hadde eendide these wordis, he
passide fro Galilee, and came in to the
eeudis of Judee ouer Jordan.

2 And manye cumpanyes ofmen sueden

hym, and he helide hem there.

3 And Pharisees camen ni^ to hym,
tempt}Tige hym, and seyinge, Wher it
be leeful for a man for to leeue"'' his
wijf, of what euer cause 1

4 The whiche answerynge seith

to
hem, Han nat 5ee rad, for he that made
men at the bygynnynge, male and female
he made hem 1

5 And he seide. For this thing a man
shal leeue fadir and modir, and he shal
cleue"'' to his wif j and thei shulen be
two in 00 flesh.

6 And so thei ben nat now two, bot
Therfore a man departe nat

00 flesh.
that thing that God enioynyde.'''

7 Thei seyen to hym, What thanne
comauiidide Moyses, to ^eue a litil boke
of forsakynge, and to leeue off"]

8 And he seith to hem, For Moyses,
at the hardnesse of 50ure herte, suffride
30U forsake ^oure wyues ; forsothe at
the begynnyng it was nat so.

9 Trcwly I seie to 30U, that who cuer
leeueih his wif, no but for fornicacioun,
and wcddith an other, doth a vowtrie
and he that wcddith the forsaken wife,
doth avowtrie.

10 His disciplis scien to hym, 3if the
so, it

cause of a man with a wijf is
speed ith nat to wcddc.

1

The whiche seith to hem, Nat alio
men taken this word ; but to which it
is 3oucn.

12 8'othcly there ben gcldyngis, tlic
whiche ]>cn thus born of the niodris
wombc ; and there ben gcldyngis, that
ben maad of men, and tlicrc l)cu gcld-
yngis, tliat lian gcldid hem self, for the
He that may
kyngdam of hcucncs.
take, take he.

13 Tliaiinc litil children wcrcn oflVid
vp to hym, that he shuldc puttc hondis

TYNDALE, 1526.

97
Chap. XIX. i And it folowcd, when
Jesus had fynysshed those sayinges, he
gat hym from Galile, and cam in to the
coostes off" lewry beyonde Jordan.

2 And moche people folowed h}Tn, and

he healed them theare.

3 Then cam vnto hym the Pharises, to
tempte hym, and sayde to hym, Ys hit
lawfull for a man to put a waye his
wyfe, for all manner off" causes ?

4 He answered and sayde vnto them,
Have ye not redde, howe that he which
made man at the begynnynge, made
them man and woman]

5 And saide. For thys thinge shall a
man leve father and mother, and cleve
vnto his wyfe j and they twane shalbe
won flesse.

6 Wherfore nowe are they not twayne,
Let not man therefore
but won fleshe.
put asunder that which God hath cup-
pled to gedder.

7 Then sayde they to hym, AVhy did
Moses commaunde, to geve vnto her a
testimoniall of divorsement, and to put
her a waye *?

8 He saide vnto them, Moses, because
of the hardnes of youre hertes, suff'red
you to put awaye youre wyfes ; but
from the begynnynge hit was nott so.

9 I saye therefore vnto you, whosoever
putteth awaye his wyfe, except hit be
for fornicacion, and maryeth another,
breaked wedlocke ; and whosoever mari-
eth her which is divorsed, doeth commyt
advoutry.

10 Then spake his disciples to hym,
Yff" the matter be so betwene man and
wyfe, then is it not good to mary.

1

He sayde vnto them. All men can
not awaye with that sayngc ; but they
to whom it is gevcii.

12 There are chaste, which were so
borne out of the mothers belly ; and
there arc chaste, which be made of men,
and there be chaste, which have made
them selves chaste;, for the kyngdoin off
hevens sake. He that can take it, Ictt
hym take it.

13 Tlu;!i were brought to hym yoiigo
chyldrcn, that he shuldc put his hondcs

H

98

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

liij^ geblcUode.
iii^-cuihtas hi;;.

Da jrreadoD hj-s Iconi-

1 4 Ua cw»^ fjc Halcnd, T

'•

lytlinj^, and ntUe j;e
cumau to me ; ewylcra ys heofeiia nee.

lii^

1 f, And till he him b}'8 banda ou-ascttc,

till fcrtle he daiion.

16 Autl dii u<

and cwa-j', L41 ^
do ic, diet ic ece lif hiehhc ?

«' him an man to,
roow, hwa't gikles

17 Da cwn')> ho, H\va»t nxa^t tlu me \tc
.S'-iliee ;rvf «1u

jrodel .Vn (j«mI ys ^'t'ul.
>vylt on lif becuman, hcald du bclnxla.

18 Da cwkI* he, Hwjlcc t Da cwte\» bc
1I;i*I»ih1, Ne do dii n
'\ht, ne ilo
<. nc suo
(!u unryht-liaMntxl, nt

dii Icuijc' i;c'\vittnys8e ;

I 9 Wurjift dinne fanler and nuKlor, ami

Infii diniu- luh^Um swil dc Hylfne.

20 \ ).i

c\va'|> 80
gehcold, liw.Tt v<? '

'

\,

F^ill dis

ic

wiiim ?

21 i

. ^ ;

boon ti
dil ahst, aud syle byt )>cai-fum.
donne lia'fst
and cum, ami 1

an«l
' hord on beofonc ;

.^.. :.n.\

'

«

'

:

"

22 Da 8e peim^a mann pehynlc diji
w»»nl. d.l otHlc ho liwog unrut, »t*»|>h*ce bo
ha'f«le myccic vhta.

h'ornii

2;j Witodliee sc lla'lond cwn^ji to h\Ti
' turn. S*>|>h\x' io oow 8tf:;r,
80 wolou'Ji ;ra^h <»n (mhI*-^

'

djot t.

rice.

24 And oft io oow so«'i:«\ (I
by|» dam olfondo to ^anno 1
cage, donuc sc wclega on hix>tuna no<-
ga.

.

2*i Da by» leorning-cnihtaa di« gohynl-
on. biu' wundriHlun, and cwirdun, 11 wa
tn

:ddun \

.>*.

i .*.

, „.. ,> 80 llirlend, Uneatlclio d.it
VM mid mannum ; ac callc )>iug synt mid
Goilc eadclicc.^

6
8
4
5

;

6
9
1

;

XIX. 14-26.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

99

to hem, and preie.
blameden hem,

Sotliely his disciplis

1

But Jhesus seith to hem, Suffre 59
litil childre cume to me, and nyl ^e for-
bede hem for to come to me ; for of
siche is the kyngdam of heuenes.

And whenne he hadde putte to hem

1

hondis, he wente thennus.

1

And loo ! oon, cummynge to, seith
to hym, Good maister, what of good
thing shal I do, that I haue euerlastynge

J 7 The which seith to hym, What axist
There is 00
For ^if thou wolt entre in

thou me of good thing 1
good God.
to lif, kepe the comaundementis.

1

He seith to hym, Whiche ? Trewly
Jhesus seide, Thou shalt nat do man
sleaynge, thou shalt nat do avowtrie,
thou shalt nat do thefte, thou shalt nat
seye fals witnessinge

19 Worshipe thi fadir and thi modir,
and thou shalt looue thi nei3hore as thi
self

20 The 5ung man seith to hym, I haue
kepte alle these thingis fro my 5outhe,
what 3it failith to me 1

21 Jhesus seith to hym, 5if thou wolt
be perfit, go, and selle alle thingus that
thou havSt, and 3eue to pore men, and
thou shalt haue tresour in heuene ; and
cum, sue thou me.

22 Forsothe whenne the ^ung man
hadde herde these wordis, he wente awey
sorvvful, for he was hauynge many pos-
sessiouns.

23 Forsothe Jhesus seide to his dis-
ciplis, I seic to 30U trewthe, for a riche
man of liard shal entre in to the kyng-
dam of lieuencs.

24 And cftsone I seie to 30U, it

is
li3ter"'' a camel for to passe tliorw3 a
nedelis ei3e, than a riclie man to entre
into the kyngdam of lieuencs.

25 Trculy these word is herd, the dis-
cijjlis wondriden grctcly, seyinge, Who
thcrforc may be saaf ?

26 Forsothe Jhesus ])eholdyngc seide
to li(!in, Anentis men this thing is im-
l)Ut anentis God alle thingis
possible ;
ben possible.

on them, and praye. And his disciples
rebuked them.

14 Jesus sayde vnto them, Suffre the
chyldren, and forbid them not to come
to me j
ffor vnto suche belongeth the
kingdome off lieven.

15 And when he had put his hondes

on them, he departed thence.

1

And beholde ! won cam, and sayde
vnto hym. Good master, what good
thinge shall I do, that I maye have
eternal lyfel

17 He sayde vnto him, Why callest
thou me good 1 There is none good but
won, and that is God. But and thou wilt
entre in to lyfe, kepe the commaund-
mentes.

18 He sayde, Which 1 And Jesus sayde,
Thou shalt not kyll, thou shalt not breake
wedloocke, thou shalt not steale, thou
shalt nott beare falce witnes

1

Honoure thy father and mother, and
thou shalt love thyne neghbour as thy
sylfe.

20 The yonge man sayde vnto him, I
have observed all these thinges from my
youth, what have Y more to do 1

2

Jesus sayde vnto him, Yf thou wylt
be perfecte, goo, and sell that thou hast,
and geve it to the povre, and thou shalt
have treasure in heven ; and come, and
folowe me.

22 When the yonge man herde that
sayinge, he went a waye morninge, for
he had greate possessions.

23 Jesus sayde then vnto his disciples,
Verely I saye vnto you, a ryche man
shall with difliculte enter into the kyng-
dome of heven.

24 And moreover I saye vnto you, it
is easier for a camell to go through the
eye of a nedle, then for a ryche man to
enter into the kingdome of heven.

25 When his disciples herde that, they
were excedingly amased, sayinge, Who
then can be saved 1

26 Jesus ])C'li('ld(! them and saide vnto
tiieu), With uwn this is viipossyble ; but
with God all thinges are possyble.

II 2

luo

COTIIIC, 3^0.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

27 Du nnclswarotlc Pctnw and cwaji,
Nil ! we f«>rleton calle J>inj;, ami folgod-
ou de ; hwaet by|) us to mcdc I

28 Da cwap|> 8C Hsclend, So[) ic eow
Bcri^'C, dait gc dc me folj^otlun, on etlcni-
Din^'C dunne inannea sunu sitt on liys
ni:v;j;en-|irymme, dat ge 8itta|) ofer twelf
8Ctl, dcmeude twclf ma»g|)a Israhel.

29 And iclc dc forlact, for minum naman,
hys lius, mlde hys ^'tbrodru. oddt^ swus-
trrt; odde failtT, odde iiu'xlor. «>dde wif,
odde beam, oddc land, be hunil-fcaldon
he oufcb)> lean, and haf)) ece lif.

30 S6}»Hce mancga f^Tmestc beo)> ytcm-

cste, and ytcracste fymicste.

Chat. XX.^ i SoI'Hcc heofona rice ys
gclic dam hircdea enldre, de on
irnie
mergcn ut-eodc, dliyrian wyrhtan on
hys win-goard.

(tewordonrc

gocwydracdene dam
wyrhtum, he sealde selcon wnnc pcnijf
wid hys da^ges weorce, he fUende hig on
hys win-gcard.

2

3 And d.I ho ut-eodc cml>c undcm-tule,
he gcseuh odre on strwte idcle sUndan.

4 Da cwic|> he, Ga ge on minne win-
goanl. ami \c ayllc eow dn;t riht by|>.
And hig da fcrdon.

5 Eft he ut-co*lc cml>c da Bixtan. and

Digo|>aD tide, and dyde dam swa gclicc.

6 Da cmbc da cndlyftan tide he ut-
'•' ; and da
< alno da-ir

r<»do, tmd fn
sa-de \u\ 11

^

'

*

'

idele t

7 Dn .
n»an m
go on miune win-gcanl

r.

: hijj. Fordam do us nan
Dii « wm 1. ho, And g;i

8 S<*|>licc da hyt wtn irfon pfowonh n.
d.-i 8««lc fc win-ijcanlcs hl.iford hy« lT"-
1 rcfan, Clypa da wyrhtan, and a'gyf hyin

CAMPBELL

;

;

XIX. 27.-XX. 8.] WyCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

101

27 Tlianne Petre answerynge seide to
hym, Loo ! we ban forsaken alle thingiSj
and we ban sued thee j what therfore
shal be to us 1

28 Jhesus forsothe seide to hem, Trewly
Y seye to 30U, that ^e that ban forsaken
alle tbingis, and sued me, in regenera-
cioun^ whenne mannes sone shall sitte
' in the sete of bis mageste, and ^e shulen
sitt on twelue setis,''' demynge the twelue
kynredis of Yrael.

29 And euery man that shal forsake
hous, or bretheren, or sistren, or fadir,
or modir, or wif, or sonys, or feeldis,
for my name, be shal take an hundrid
fold, and shal welde euere lastynge lyf.

30 Forsothe many shulen be, the firste

27 Then answered Peter and saide to
him, Bebolde ! we have forsaken all,
and have folowed the ; what shall we
have ther fore 1

28 Jesus sayde vnto them, Verely I
saye to you, thatt ye which have folowed
me, in the seconde generacion when the
Sonne off man shal S3^t in the seate of
his maieste, shall syt also vppon xij
seates, and iudge the xij
trybes off
Israhel.

29 And whosoever forsaketh housse,
or brethren, or systers, other father, or
mother, or wyfe, or children, or lyvelod.
for my names sake, the same shall re-
ceave an hundred folde, and shall inbei'et
everlastynge lyfe.

30 Many that are fyrste shalbe laste,

the laste, and the laste the firste.

and the laste shalbe ffyrste.

Chap. XX.

i The kyngdam of he-
lie to an husbond man, that
uenes is
wente out first erly,"*" to byre workemen
in to his vyne 5erd.

2 Forsothe the couenaunt maad with
workmen, of a peny for the day, be
sente hem in to bis vyne 3erd.

Chap. XX.

i For the kyngdom off
heven ys lyke vnto an houssholdcr, which
went out erly in the morninge, to byre
labourers into hys vynyarde.

2 And he agreede with the labourers,
for a peny a daye, and sent them into
his vynyarde.

3 And be, gon out about the thridde
hour, say other stondynge ydil in the
chepyng.
4 And he seide to hem. Go and ^ee in
to my vyne 5erd, and that that shal be
ri3tful, I shal 3eue to 30U.
Sotheli thei
wen ten forth.

5 Forsothe cftsoonc he wente out aboutc
the sixte hour, and the nyncthc, and
dide on licbc manere.

6 But aboutc the cllcucnthc bourc be

wente out, and foond otlicr stondynge
and he seide to hem, What stonden ^g
her ydil al day]

7 Tliei scien to hym, For no man bath
hirid us. He seith to hem, Go and 50 in
to my vyne 3crd.

8 Forsotlic whcnnc cucnyngc was maad,
the lord of tbc vyne 3crd seitb to his
procuratour, Clcpc tbc workmci), and

3 And he went out about the thyrde
houre, and sawe other stondyng ydell in
the market place.

4 And sayd vnto them, Go ye also into
my vynyarde, and whatsoever is riglit, I
And they went there
will geve you.
way.

5 Agayne he went out about tbc syxtc,

and nynthe bourc, and dyd lykc wysc.

6 And he went out aboutc the clcvcntbc

bourc, and founde other stondynge ydcll
and sayde vnto them, Why stondc ye
here all the daye ydcll 1

7 They sayde vnto bym. Because no
man hath byrcd vs. He sayde to them,
Goo ye alsoo into my vynyarde, and
whatsoever nliiilbc right, that sliall ye
rcccavc.

8 When even was come, tbc lorde of
tbc vyncyardc sayde vnto liys steward,
Call the labourers, and gcvc tliciii their

102

GOTHIC, 36o.

1

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

hror .
ocl M

'

'

;

aji^'j'nn fram dam ytomestan,
iiif«tnn.

9 E<»mo8tlice da de* gecomon, dc cnil>c
da ondlyftan t'do comon, da onftrngoii
hig ajlc his j>oninj».

10 And da de da?r wrcat comon weml-
lii;; sccoUlon miirc onfon, da

on, d.i't
onfcngon hig syndrige pcncgas.

1

Da ongunnon hig murcnian ongun

done hiredcs ealdor,

I 2 And du8 cwaedon, Das ytomc «tan

worhton unc tide, and <1
(1e hicron Ityrn

gcli'ce ufl.
da^es hsetan.

13 Du cwa'}> he, nntlsw

!i}Ta
ic de
anuni, Eida du frcond, k
na-nne tconan ; hu ne come du to me
to wyrceaiine wid imum peninge ?

T4 Xim dnt din yn, and gi» ; ic wjUe
dysuni yteniestum syllan, eal swu nncel
8wa de.

If, Odde nc mot ic d('n da^t ic %^-jllc ?
lIwffMler de din cage nianfnl y*. O'fdnm
de ic god com 1

\6 8wa l>eo|> da fyrni«>t.i.i
and da ytemestan fymusto ; >>
>n-
ega synt gecly|>cde, and feawn L:r«M»renc,*^
m,

<•,

17 Da frrde se H.t1«'iu1 to I
and nam hj-s leoniing-cnihta-
and dns cwn'|>.

•11.

,

18 Nil! we fara|> to Hi

mannes Hunu l'^'- "••"aid ii.=
ealdnmi, and I
eriaj) hync to deaj't*,

II. aiai
>,«< crda
; and liig gcnyd-

19 peo<lum to b}"»mrigennc, and to
Bwini^enne, and to ahonnc ; and dam
|>n'ddan da»ge he arist.

ao l>>i com to him Zcl)cdeii bcama
:o-oa4l-

'

modor mid h>Te beav
nu'dendf mul ^um Im!
dende.

\>\i\-

I

21 Da cwa')» he, Hwat wylt dii I' Da
cwn'Y ^^*^^' ^^'A^ ^^^^ dU mine twet;en
Buna nittan. an on dine gwidran liealfe,
and an on dine wynstran, on dinum
rice.

22 Da andswarode him sc Hielend,
Mage gjt

G^-t nj-ton hwa?t g}*t l)i<Uhi|».

8
5
6
1

;

9
8

XX. 9-22.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

103

5elcle to hem her hijre, bygynnynge at
the laste til to the firste.

9 Therfore whenne thei weren corn-
men, that camen about the elleuenth
hour, and thei token synguler pens.'''

10 Trewly and the firste cummynge
demeden, that thei weren to take more,
trewly and thei token echon by hym silf
a peny.

1

And thei takynge grutcheden a3eins

the husbond man,

12 Seyinge, These laste diden loorche
oon our, and thou hast maad hem euen
to vs, that han born the charge of the
day and hete.

13 And he answerynge to oon of hem,
seide, Frend, I do thee no wronge
whether thou hast nat accordid with me
for a peny ]

14 Take that that is thine, and go ;
forsothe Y wole ^eue and to this the
laste man, as and to thee.

1

Wher it is nat leful to me for to do
that that I wole ? Wher thin ei5e is
wickid, for I am good 1

1

So there shulen be the last men the
firste, and the firste m^n the laste j for
many ben clepid, bot few chosun.

17 And Jhesus, steyinge vp to Jerusa-
lem, toke his twclue disciplis in priuytee,
and seith to hem,

1

Loo ! we gon \'p to Jerusalem, and
mannes sone shal be taken to princis of
prestis, and scribis ; and thei shulen
condempue hym by deth.

19 And thei shulen bitake hym to
hethen men, for to be scornyd, and
Bcourgid, and crucified ; and the thridde
day he shal rysc a3cin.

20 Thanne the modir of the sonis
of Zebcdc came ni3 to hym with hire
Bonyn, honourynge, and axingc sumo
thing of hym.

21 The whichc seide to

hir, Wliat
wolt thou ] She seith to hym, Seic that
these two my sonys sitten, oon at thi
ri3thalf, and oon at thi Icftlialf, in thi
kyngdam.

22 Forsothe Jhesus answerynge seide,
3c wytcn nat what 3c axcn.^ Mowcn 30

hyi-e, begynnyng at the laste tyll thou
come to the fyrste.

9 And they whiche were hyred aboute
the el eventhe houre cam, and receaved
every man a peny.

I o Then cam the fyrst, supposyng that
they shulde receave mooare, and they
like wyse receaved every man a peny.

I I And when they bad receaved it they
grudged agaynst the good man of the
housse,

12 Sayng, These laste have wroght
but one houre, and thou hast made them
equall vnto vs, which have born the
burthen and heet of the daye.

13 He answered to one of them, saynge,
Frende, I do the no wronnge ; dyddeste
thou not agre withe me for a penny %

14 Take that which is thy duty, and
I -will geve vnto this

goo thy \\caye ;
last, as moche as to the.

15 Ys yt not lawfull fibr me to do as
me listeth with myne awne 1 Ys thyne
eye evyll, because I am good 1

16 Soo the laste shalbe fyrste, and the
fyrste shalbe laste ; for many are called,
and feawe be chosen.

17 And Jesus ascended to Jerusalem,
and toke the xij disciples aparte in the
way, and sayde to them,

1

Loo ! we goo vp to Jerusalem,
and the sonne off man shalbe betrayed
vnto the chef prestes, and vnto the
scrybes ; and they shall condemne hym
to deeth.

1

And shall delivre hym to the gen-
tils, to be mocked, to be scourged, and
to be crucified ; and the third day he
shall ryse agayne.

20 Then cam to hym the mother off
Zebedcs children witli her sonnes wor-
shippyngc him, and dcsyrynge a cer-
tayne thynge off hym.

21 Jle sjiyde vnto her. What wylt thou
She sayde vnto hym, (iniuiitc
have?
that these my two sonnes maye sitt, one
on tliy rii^lit liond, and the other on thy
lifte hondc, in tliy kyiigdom.

22 Jesus answered and sayd, Y(^ wot
Are ye al)le (o

not whatt ye axe.

104

(JOTIIJC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

<lrincan done calic dc ic to drincennc
!>u cwiC'don big, Wyt
1j:i1»I»c r .

in'igon.

*

'

' incaj) ;

23 Da cwDDJ) be, WitotllJcc ggrt minno
. to sittaniic on iitiuc
!i hialfe oddc on wyustran, uys
mc inc to syllannc ; ac dani dc hyi fnim
miuuni faxlcr gegcarwod ys.

.

.

24 And da da t}-n Icorninfjrnihtaa

gcbulgon wid da twej^eii gel»rtKlru.

25 iXi cl>-])odc 8c Ha'lcuil hi to him,
and cwaj), Wite pc, da»t etddor>mcnn
wcaldaj) hyra |>cotla, and da dc synt
yldrau, hahl)aj» oiiwcaUl on hiiu,

26 No hy[) swa 1
Invylc 8wa wylc btt
sy he cower jjen ;

•

cow; nc swa
w bcou yldra,

27 And se dc wylc Utweox cow bcoD

fynnt'st, sy he cower |>cow.

28 Swa manncs sunu ne com da?t him
man JH-node, ac dut he |»cnotle, and
Ilia sawlc lif to alysediiease for
.in/

C0..1.1..

29^ And da hig fcrdon frum Iliericho,

liim fyligdc niycrl nicn^pL

30 And di sa'ton twegen blindc wid
done wcg, and ^ehynlon dat se Hivlcnd
f(L*rde ; and da '
' \r t<» him. and
cwa'don. l^iilit
.; im.
IVaiidca
SUDtL

... ^.

:

'

.31 Da Uail

FUWtKlon ; daii-i
Drihtcu, gcmiltsa imc, Dui.

. t

ln')T

Ic ina,

.:iu.

32 Da stod 80 Hfclend, and ch-pinlc
bii,' to him, and cwa')>, llwa't wyllc gyt
dat ic inc do 1
^^ Dii cwwdon hi^, Drihtcn. da t uncw

cagan hid |^-opouc<lc.

34 i)il
caji^ n I
and fyligdoD him.

'fs<^xlo \w Ijiin. and hyn*
and hig bona gc&dwon,

CllAP. XW I And dal

la'litc
IIicrus.Ucm, and com to iKUimge, to

XX. 23.-XXI. I.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

drynke tlie cuppe that I am to drynke "?

Thei seien to hym, We mowen.

23 He seith to hem, Forsothe ^e shal
drynke my cuppe ; but to sitte at the
ri3thalf or at lefthalf, it is nat myn to
5eue to 50U ; but to whiche it is made
redy of my fadir.

24 And the ten herynge hadden indig-

nacioun of the two bretheren.

25 Sothely Jhesus elepide hem to hym,
and seith, ^e witen, for princis of heithen
men ben lordis of hem, and thei that
ben more, hawnten power in to hem.

26 It shal nat be so among 50U ; bot
who euere wole be maad more among
50U, be he 30ure mynystre ;

27 And who euere amonge 50U wole

be firste, he shal be ^oure seruaunt.

28 As mannes sone came nat for to be
Bei-ued, but for to serue, and for to 3eue
his soule^ redempcioun for many.

29 And hem goynge out of Jerico,
manye cumpanyes of peple sueden hym.
30 And loo ! two blynd men sittynge
besidis the weyc, herden that Jhesus
passide ; and thei crieden, seyinge. Lord,
the sone of Dauyth, haue mercy on vs.

31 Forsothe the cumpanye blamyde
hem, for to be stille ; and thei crieden
more and more, seiynge, Lord, the sone
of Dauyth, haue mercy on vs.

32 And Jhesus stood, and clopide hem,
and seith. What wole 3c, tliat I do to
joul

33 Tlici scicn to hym, Lord, that oure

ei3en ]>c openyd.

34 Forsothe Jhesus, hauynge mercy on
hem, touchide her ei3cn ; and unoon thei
iaycD, and sueden hym.

;

TYNDALE, 1526.

105
drynke off the cuppe that Y shall drynke
of, [and to be baptised with the bap-
tim that Y shalbe baptised with '?] They
answered to him. That we are.

23 He sayd vnto them, Ye shall drynke
of my cupe, and shalbe baptised with
the baptim that Y shall be baptysed
with ; but to syt on my ryght bond and
on my lyft bond, is not myne to yeve
but to them for whom it is prepared of
my father.

24 And when the ten herde this they

desdayned att the two brethren.

25 But Jesus called them vnto hym,
and saide, Ye knowe, that the lordes of
the gentyls have dominacion over them,
and they that are great, exercise power
over them.

26 It shall not be so amonge you ; but
whosoever wyll be greate among you,
let hym be youre minister;

27 And whosoever wilbe chefe, let

him be youre servaunt.

28 Even as the sonne off man cam not
to be ministred vnto, butt to minister,
and to geve his lyfe for the redempcion
off many.

29 And as they departed from Hierico,

moche people folowed hym.

30 And beholde ! two blynde men
syttinge by the way syde, when they
herde that Jesus passed by, cryed, say-
inge. Master, the sonne off David, have
mercy on vs.

31 And the people rebuked them, be
cause they shuldc liolde there peace ;
but they cryed the moare, sayinge. Have
mercy on vs, Master, which arte the
Sonne off David.

32 Then Jesus stode styll, and called
them, and sayde. What will ye, that Y
shall do to you ?

33 They said vnto hym, Master, that

oure eyes maye be opened.

34 Jesus pitied tliem, and touclied
there eyes ; and imniediutly thcire eyes
receved syght, and they folowed hym.

Chap. XXI.

1 And whannc Jhesus
came ni} to Jerusalem, and cam toJJcth-

Chap. XXI. i When they drewe nyo
vnto Jerusalem, and were come to Bet-

IOC)

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

Oliuetefl dune, da aendc he hjB twcgcu
Icornin^-cnihtas,

a And ssedc him, Fani)» on divt rastol

rtirt foran onpoAn cow y
Bonn findo g}t ilnc ofJBont
hyre folnn mid hyrc ; unti^'t*a|) hig. and
la'daji to nic.

_

»

I

'

*

•

•

3 And ;:yf hwa cow ipnijj |>ing to cwy|»,
8ecgea)>, (1n>t Drihton ha'f|» itysos ncodc ;
and dunnc forlsrt he euw hnedlice.

4 I^nll (lis waw gewordcn, dirt vrwrc
gcfyllt<l rt.Tt |>urli Hftainni (tone witegan
gccwe<U'n >%»•«,

5 Secj^'onj) heahnosso dt'htor, Nil I

(\\n
cyninfj de cym)> to, gcdafto, and rit U|»-
pan t4»mre asscne, and hyre folnn.

6 Da fenlon h>-8 Icoming-cnihtns, and

dydon swa ho liim bel>c<id.

7 And la^ddon da aftscnc to him, and
h}Ta folan. and ledon h}Ta reaf up|»aii
hig, nn<l s
8 Witod

^ no an iippan.
I folc streliton hyra rw»f
on done weg; mime hoowun dn^n» troow.i
bogns, and streowedon* on done weg.

*

9 Djrt folc da>t dar beforan fcrtlo, and
dR»t dnr a^ftor funic, ch-podon, and cwrmI
on, Hal FV dii Dauidrs sunn ; hv gc
bletstKl BO de com on I>rihtonc« naman ;
sy him hsl on hehncssum.

10 t)a he fcnle to lerusjdom. da w«U'|>
eall Bco hurh-wnru onstjTctl, and cwwd
on, Hwnt is dest

11 l)a cwie|> dipt folc, Difl ys sc Had-

cnd, witcga, of Narareth on Cialiloa,

13 Da RC Hwlend into dam toiv ^'

etnlc, ho adnlf lit oallo da do coajx
innan dam temple ; ami darn mynoton
oeUDelat. and hy
*'ii, dara do culf-
rtn tenldon. ho t<

13 And cwa»|> to him. Hyt vb awritcn.
witodlicc g«

liuB VB gol>otl-huB ;

Mill
WOrhtoQ d;«t f.i Intfa loto.

14 l>n ootlon to him d.t Itlindan and

da healtai), and ho hi goha:ldo.

If; \N1to<llice da dara Raccnla caldra-

2
1

!

XXI. 2-15.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

!

J 07

fage. in the mount of Olj^eet, tlianne
Jhesus sente his two disciplis,

2 Seyinge to hera, Go 56 in to the
castel that is a5einus 50U, and anon 50
ehal fynde a she asse tyed, and a colt
with hir : vnbynde 36, and bryng to
me.

3 And ^if eny man shal seie to 50U eny
thinge, seie ^e, that the Lord hath need
to hem ; and anoon he shal leeue hem.

4 Trewly al this was don, that that
thing that was seid by the prophete
shulde be fulfillid, seyinge,

5 Seie 5e to the dou5ter of Syon, Loo
thi kyng cometh to thee, homly,''' sitt-
ynge on an asse, and a fole, the sone of
a heest vndir 300k.

phage, vnto mounte Olivete, then sent
Jesus two off his disciples,

2 Sayinge to them. Go in to the toune
that lyeth over agaynste you, and anon
ye shall fynde an asse bounde, and her
colte with her; lose them, and bringe
them vnto me.

3 And if eny man saye ought vnto you,
saye ye, that youre Master hath neade
off them ; and streyght waye he will let
them go.

4 All this was donne, to fulfyll that
which was spoken by the prophet, say-
inge,

5 Tell ye the doughter of Sion, Beholde
thy kinge commeth vnto the, meke, sitt-
inge vppon an asse, and a colte, the foolc
off an asse vsed to the yooke.

6 Forsothe disciplis, goynge, diden as

6 The disciples went, and did as Jesus

Jhesus comaundide hem.

7 And thei brou3ten to a she asse, and
the fole, and puttiden her clothis on
hem, and maden hym sitte aboue.

8 Forsothe ful muche cumpanye strew-
iden her clothis in the wey ;
sothely
other kittiden braunchis of trees, and

I

j strowiden in the weye.

9 But the cumpanyes that wenten be-
fore, and that sueden, crieden, seyinge,
Osanna^ to the sone of Dauith ; blessid
is he that cummeth in the name of the
Lord ; Osanna in the hee^ist thingis.

10 And when he had entrid in to Jcru-
Balem, al the cite was stirid, seyinge,
Wlio is this 1

1

Trculy tlic pcplis seiden. This is
Jhesus, the prophete, of Nazareth of
Galilee.

1

And Jhesus cntridc in to the temple
of God, and kest out of the temple alio
Bcllynge and byinge ; and he tuniydc
vpsadoun the bordis of chaungeris, and
the cliaiers of men sellyiige culueris,

13 And he seith to hem, It is writen.
My hous shal be clcj)id an lious of
forsothe 3c ban made it a
preicre ;
denne of tlicfcs.

14 And blyndc and crokid ramrn ni^
to hym in tlic temple, and he helidc
hem.

15 Forsothe the princis of prcstis and

commaunded them.

7 And brought the asse, and the colte,
and put on then there clothes, and set
him there on.

8 Many of the people spreed theire
garmentes in the waie ; other cut doune
braunches from the trees, and strawcd
them in the waye.

9 Moreover the people that went be-
fore, and they also that cam after,
cried, sayinge, Hosianna to the sonnc of
David; blessed be he that commeth in
the name of the Lorde ; Hosianna in
the hyest.

10 And when he was come in to Jeru-
salem, all the cite was moved, sayinge.
Who ys this 1

I T And the people sayde, Thys ys
Jesus, the prophet, off Nazareth a cite
of Galile.

12 And Jesus went in to the temple of
God, and caste out all them that ])ought
and solde in the temple ; and overthrew
the tables of the mony chaungers, and
the seates of them that soldo doves.

13 And saide to them. It is written,
Mine housse shalbe called the housse off
prayer ; butt ye have made it a denn of
thcves.

14 And the blinde and the halt cam
to hym in the temple, and he healed
them.

15 When the chcfe prcstcs and scribes

108

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

and rta boccnw pfcsnwnn dn wumlni (\
8C Hirleiul W4»rl»to, and p-liynlon liu ili
did clypodon on dam tempi**, and cwsrd
on, Sy Dauidcs sunu lial, cU wscrun lii^-
yrrc,

16 And cwedon, Gchyrst du hwrrt da-
cwirda|)1 Da cwn'|> ho, W '
no
raSddon pje n£'fre, !>u fulfinn-,
f "f
cilda, and of succndra^ mu|>e t

.

17 And he forlct lii da, and fenle of

dajrc byrip, to Ikthania ; and la'rdc 1
dar be Godcs rice.

18 On morpjcn, da he cfl to da»rc

!<• 1)\tio.

byrig for, da 1
19 And hi-

^

an fic-treow wid
done weg, da eode he to him, and n<
fundc on liim l»uton da leaf ano ; d i
cwa'}) he, Nc ^'urde na-fre weastm of
dc acenncd. Da Bona forscranc dat
fic-treow.

20 And his Icominij-cnihtas w'< t. -1.

on, and cwa:ilon, Ixu-a mi hu 1
dat fic-treow forscranc.

^5

21 Da andswarotle he him. nntl cw '

S6|> ic cow sccjje, ^'f gc habbaj) m
nn, and ne twynia^, nc do f^ mi da>t an
Ik^ dam fic-treowe, ac eac deh j;*-
to disuni miinte, Aliefe de iii«]>, :.
in nan da sal

*

.

,

a 3 And ealles Aton dc gc biddaj^ gc

bcoji ti|ia, p5 f ge gelyfa|>/

23 Da he com into dam temple, d.i

com un dara sacerda ealdraa
him to, an<l cwa^lon. On hwv'
wyrcst dii das |'ing I and hw.
disnc an weald t

-

'

•

•

.-

24 Dn and8waro<le 8C Hiclend him and
cwn?|», And ic alisige cow an re spnrcc,
P}f go mo da Bpnvco 8ecgca|\ donno
serge ic cow, on hwylcum anwcaldc ic
da« |>inp w\Trc,

2r,

1

WICS lohannefl

dc of 111 w..,,iim, de of mannum ?
cwvdon hig
ie^»|>

heofonc, donnc cwyj)

l>ctwux

of

fulluht ;
Da
him, Gyf wc

lie,

1

6
9

XXL 1 6.-25.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

109

scribis, seeynge the marueilouse tliingis
that he dide, and children cryinge in
the temple, and seiynge, Osanna to the
sone of Dauith, dedeyneden,

sawe the marveylles thatt he dyd, and
the chyldren cryinge in the temple, and
sayinge, Hosianna to the Sonne of David,
they desdayned,

16 And seiden to hym, Heerist thou
what these seyen ? Sothely Jhesus seith
to hem, 3he ; wher ^e han nat rad. For
of the mouth of children * and of souk-
ynge mylk, thou hast made parfite
heryinge 1

17 And, hem. forsaken, he wente forth
out of the citee, in to Betanye j and
there he dwelte, and taujte hem of the
kyngdam of God.

1

And sayde vnto hym, Hearest thou
what these saye ? Jesus sayde vnto them,
Have ye never redde. Off the mouth off
babes and suckelinges, thou haste or-
deyned prayse]

17 And he lefte them, and went out of
the cite vnto Bethani ; and passed the
tyme there.

18 Forsothe on the raorw, he, turn-

18 In the mornynge, as he returned

ynge a5ein in to the citee, hungride.

19 And he, seeynge a fige tree bysidis
the weye, came to it, and fonde no
thing ther on no but leeuys oonly ; and
he seith to it, Neuer be fruyt born of
thee, in to with outen eende. And
anoon the fijge tree was dried vp.

20 And disciplis seeynge, wondreden,

seyinge, Hou anon it driede.

2

Sothely Jhesus answerynge, seith to
hem, Trewly I seye to 50U, ^if ^e shulen
han feith, as a corn of seneuey, and
douten nat, nat oonly 3e shulen do of
this fijge tree, bot and 5if ^e seien to
this hill, Take thee, and caste thee in
to the see, and so it shal be don.

22 And alle thingis what cucr ^e
5ee

preier byleuynge,

shulen axe in
shulen take.

23 And whenne he came in to the
temple, the princis of prcstis and eldre
men of the peple camen ni3 to hym
techynge, seyinge, In what power dost
thou these thingis 1 and who 3af to thee
this i)Owcr 1
. 24 Jhesus answerynge seidc to hem,
And 1 shal axe 30U o word, the \vhic'h(;
jif 30 shulen seie to me, and I slud
seie to 30U, in what power I do these
tliingis.
\ 25 Of whenncs was the baptem of
Joon ; of* heuene, or of men 1 And tliei
thou3tcn with inne hem self, soyingf,
3if we shulen seie of licucnc, he slial

I

in to the cite ageyne, he hungred.

1

And spyed a fygge tree in the waye,
and cam to it, and founde nothinge there
on but leves only; and said to it. Never
frute growe on the, hence forwardes. And
anon the fygge tree wyddered awaye.

20 And when his disciples sawe that,
they marvelled, sayinge, How sone is
the fygge tree wyddered awaye.

21 Jesus answered, and sayde vnto
them, Verely I saye vnto you, yff ye
shall have fayth, and shall not dout, ye
shall nott only do that which Y have
done to the fygge tree, but also yf ye
shall saye vnto this mountayne, Take
thy silfe a waye, and cast thy silfe in to
the see, it shalbe done.

22 And whatsoever thinge ye shall axe
in youre prayers if ye beleve, ye shall
receave hit.

23 And when he was come into the
temple, the chefe prestes and the scni-
ores of the people cam vnto him as he
was teachinge, and sayde, By what
auctorite doest thou those thingcs? and
who gave the this jjower]

24 Jesus answered and sayde vnto
them, I also wyll axe of you a certayne
(juestion, which if ye asoyle me, Y in
lyke wyse wyll tell you, by what auc-
torite I do th«'M(! thinges.

25 Wlicnee was the l)aptim of Jlion ;
And tlioy
from licvcn, or of men ?
thought in themselves, sayinge ; Yf wn
shall saye from hevcn, he W}11 sajc;

no

GOTHIC, 360.

ANG LOSA XON, 995.

[St. M ati

«

Forliwuiii ne gclyfde jjo him ?

26 CJyf wc sccprnj'

«'i

II

ondra'tlaj) dis
luliuniiem for aiinc wtofpin.

eallc

fulc,

1

II

27 Da aiKlswurcflon lii;; ami «
Wc iivtou.
w no
l)d cwiij) he, Nf ic «
BCCi^c, of hwylcuin aiiwcaldc ic claa )>ing
wyrce.

,

28 Hu |)inc}) cow?

A'n inann lin*f«l«'
twcgcn suna ; da cwa-j) lie to dam } Kl-
ran, Suno, ga and wyrcc to dieg on
minuni win-gcrde.

29 Dacwnj) he, Ic nolle;

eotle dch syddan to dmii win-gcrdc.

30 Dii cwa»}) he eal swa to dam 6*1-
nini. J)a andswarudc sc him, and cwn'|',
Illaford, ic ga ; and no iikIc swa iliili.

31

IIwfi'diT dara t\vt';,Tu dy*lc

il.»

willan ?

Da cwa'don hig. So
fii'dcr
[yldra.]^ Da cw»|> sc lla-lcnd to him,
ic cow scctjc. da»t manfullc and
So|)
niyltystnm gu\> bcfonui cow t»u Goilca
rice.

32 lohanncs com on ryhtwisncRsc \\

'

'

' n him; >ntou.i-j
and go ne
;nui gclyfdon. Ami
nianfullc and ;
gc RCSiiwon. and ne dydon syddiin niln-
d;td-b6te, dwt gc gelyfdoD on him.

33 Gchyni}) mi ('nlcr
hircdca enldor wa% gc
gcnl, and K'tjiidc hync. and ncttt n.ir
on win-\\Tingan, and gctimhrotle ann<
Tuyd cor|>-tylioii
BtyiK'l.and g,-
and frrdc t»n >

,...,.

>e.

.,-

'

•

1

,

..

34 Da duTtt wcaKtma t d pcncahrht4

dii wMidc he hys '
tylion, da't hig 01.

*

'

35 Dh 1

swnngon
sumnc hig oftorfodon.

hii^ hys |>eowas. an<I
of^logon.

. sumnc hi

36 Da sende ho eft odrc |?cown'« --''• m

donnc dam ^mui wvron, da (\n
dam gel ice.

37 .Kt nyhstau he sciidc hys sunn hym

XXL 26-37-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
seie to vs, Whi tlierfore beleuen ^e nat
to hym'?

26 Sothely 5if we sliulen seie of men,
we dreden tbie cumpanye of peple, for
alle hadde Joon as a prophete.

27 And thei answerynge to Jhesu
seiden, We witen nat. And he seith
to hem, Nether I seie to 30U, in what
power I do these thingis.

28 Forsothe what semeth to 50U'? Sum
man hadde two sonys ; and he cum-
mynge ni^ to the firste seide, Sone, go
to myn
for to worche this day in
\yne3erd.

29 Sothely he answerynge seith,

I
nyle ; forsothe afterward he stirid by
penaunce,^ wente.

30 Forsothe he, cummynge to the
And he an-
tother, seide lie maner.
swerynge seith, Lord, I go ; and he
wente nat.

31 Who of the two dide the fadris
Thei seien to hym, The firste.
>vill ?
Jhesus seith to hem, Trewly I seie to
50U, for puplicanys and hooris shulen
go before 50U in to the kyngdam of
God.

32 Forsothe Joon cam to 50U in the
weye of ri3twisnesse, and ^e bileeueden
nat to hym ; but puplicanys and hooris
beleucden to hym. Sothely 5ee seeynge
nether hadde don penaunce afterward,
that 36 bileeuydeu to hym.

33 Ileere 3c an other parable.

Ther
was an husbondman, that plantide a
vyne 3erd, and 3aue an hegge aboute,
and dalue a pressour therynne, and
bildide a toure, and hiride^ it to crthe
tiliers, and wente ferre in pilgrimage.

34 Forsothe whenne the tyme of fruytis
nei3ide, he sentc his seruauntis to the
erthe tiliers, that thei token fruytis of

it.

35 And^ his seruauntis taken, the erthe
tiliers beeten the toon, an other thei
glewen, but another thei stoonydcn to
deth.

36 Eftsones he sentc other sei-uauntis,
mo than tlie firste, and liclie maner
tlici diden to hem.

37 Forsothe at the lastc he sent his

1

;

TYNDALE, 1526.

Ill
vnto vs. Why dyd ye not then beleve
hym ?

26 But and iff we shall saye of men,
then feare we the people, for all men
helde Jhon as a prophet.

27 And they answered Jesus and sayde,
We cannot tell. He lyke wyse sayd
vnto them, Nether tell I you, by what
auctorite Y do these thinges.
28 What saye ye to thys ? A certayne
man had ij sonnes ; and cam to the
elder sayinge ; Go and worke to daye in
my vyneyarde.

29 He answered and sayd, I wyll not

but afterwarde repented, and went.

30 Then cam he to the seconde, and
sayde lyke wyse. And he answered and
sayde, I wyll, Syr ; yet went he not.

3

Whedder of these ij fulfylled there
fathers wylH And they sayde vnto
hym, The fyrst.
Jesus sayde vnto them,
Verely I saye vnto you, that the pub-
licans and the harlotes shal come into
the kyngdome off God before you.

3 2 For Jhon cam vnto you in the waye
of righte wesnes, and ye beleved hym
not; but the publicans and the whoores
But ye though ye sawe
beleved hym.
it, yet were not moved with repentaunce,
that ye myght afterwarde have beleved
hym.

33 Herken another similitude.

There
was a certayne housholder, whych set a
vyneyarde, and hedged it rounde about,
and made a wynpresse in it, and bilt a
tower, and lett it out to husbandmen,
and went in to a straunge countre.
34 And when the tyme of the frute
drewe neare, he sent his servauntes to
the husbandmen, to receave the frutcs
of it.

35 And the luisbandmcn caui^dit his
servauntes, and bet won, kylled another,
and stoned another.

36 Aguiue he sent other servauntes,
moo tlien the fyrst, and they served
them lyke wyse.

37 But lust of all he sent vnto them

112

GOTHIC, 3^0.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

to, nml cwir|», Hi^' forwandinj) dat liig
nc <loii mintnn Ktinft swd.
38 Witotllice da da tvl
j:,'cs.iwon, dii cwaedon hi^
I)c8 ys yrfenuma, uton fipin, and ofiilcau
hyne, and liabban us hys ac!»ta.

*

i

39 Da namon hipj, and ofslo^on h\-ne,

and awurpon widiitan done win-gcard.

40 IIwa?t de|) diP8 win-gcardofl hllfurJ

dam cor|)-tylion, donnc he cyni|) ?

41 Dii cwacdon hig, He forde|) da j-fel-
an m'u\ yfcle, and gosett hys win ;;onl
mid odnim tilion, de him Ijys wa>stin
hyni tiiluni a^^'j-fon.

42 Da cwa^}' 80 r "

1. Xc m'
a de du :

•

niefre on ;;iwrituii.
endan ihnirpon, ys geworden to d.i-ro
hyrnan licafde? Dys ys fram Dril.tno
geworden, and hyi
ys wumlorlic on
drum eagum.
43 Fonlam ic 8eri::c cow. da^t cow l)y|»
O'tlirotlcn (mmIos rice, and by|» ges<.ald
daTC }>oode de hys caniaji.

44 And sc de fyl|> uppan dysno st.in,
he hy|» tohrj-sctl ; and he tol.rvs|> ,1,.n,».
do he on upimn fy\p.

45 Da dn?ra saccnla caMras an«l da
Pharisei d^s bigs|>el gchynhm, da on-
geton I
46 Hi

• hv hit sa'de \yc him.
-.i hyne, ami itndri'ihui dn t
foic, fordam de lii ha^fdon hyne for a'nnc
witogan.

..:

'

Chap. XXII

i Da g:rdc ho h^n

eft mler bigf){)cll, an<l dus cwa»|^.

2 HcH)fona rice y» gcb'c gcwurilrn dam

cyningc dc macodc hys suna gyfta.

3 And sonde his jwowas antl rlv -• >

da gehidwlan to dam gyftum, da i
hi en man.

4 D.i scmle he eft odcrc )>eowas, and

1

XXI.38.-XXIL4.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

113

to hem, seyinge, Thei

sone
sliame^ my sone.

sliulen

hys awne sonne,
feare my sonne.

sayinge, They wyll

38 Sotbely the erthe tiliers, seeynge
the sone, seiden with ynne hem self,
This is the eire ; cume 56, slea we hym,
and we shulen haue his eritage.

39 And, hym taken, thei kesten out of

the vyn^erd, and slewen.

40 Therfore whenne the lord of the
vyne3erd shal cume, what shal he do
to the ilk erthe tiliers?

41 Thei'seien to hym. He shal lese
ynele the yuel men, and sette to hire
his vyne5erd to other erthe tiliers, the
whiche shulen jelde to hym fruytis in
her tymes.

42 Jhesus seith to hem, Redden 50
neuer in scripturis, The stoon the whiche
beldjTige men reproueden, this is maad
Of the
in to the heued of the corner ]
Lord this thing is maad, and it is mer-
ueilous in oure ei3en.

43 Therfore I seie to 50U,

for the
kyngdam of God shal be taken fro 50U,
and shal be ^ouen to a folk doinge
fruytis of it.

44 And he that shal falle on this stoon,
shal be broken togidre ; forsothe vpon
whom it shal falle, it shal togidre pouue
hym.

45 And when the princis of prestis
and Pharisees hadden herde his parablis,
thei kncwen that he seide of hem.

46 And thei, seekynge to holde hym,
dredcn the cumpanycs of pcplc, for thei
hadden hym as a prophete.

38 When the husbandmen sawe his
Sonne, they sayde amonge them selves,
Thys ys the heyi'e j come on, lett vs
kyll hym, and lett vs take hys inheryt-
aunce to oure selves.
39 And they caught hym, and thrust
him out of the vyneyarde, and shlewe
him.

40 When the lorde of the vyneyarde
commeth, what wyll he do with those
husbandmen 1

4

They sayde vnto hym, He will evyll
destroye those evyll persons, and wyll
lett out hys vyneyarde vnto other hus-
bandmen, whych shall delyver hym his
frute att tymes convenient.

42 Jesus saide vnto them, Dyd ye
never redde in the scriptures. The same
stone which the bylders refused, is set
in the princypall parte of the corner ?
This was the Lordes doinge, and yt is
mervelous in oure eyes.

43 Therfore saye I vnto you, the king-
dome of God shalbe taken from you,
and shalbe geven to the gentyls which
shall brynge forth the frutes off it.

44 And whosoever shall fall on thys
stone, shalbe alto broken ; and whom-
soever thys stone shall fall oppon, he
shall grynde him to powder.
45 And when the chefe prestes and
similitudes, they
Pharyses
perceaved that he spake of them.
46 And they went about to

laye
hondes on hym, but they feared the
peoi>le, because they counted hym as
a prophet.

herde his

CiiAP. XXII.

I And Jhosus answcr-
yngc seidc cftsonc in parablis to hem,
eiynge,

2 The kyngdam of hcuencs is mand lie
to a man kyng that made weddingus to
his sone.

3 And he sentc liis scruauntis for to
clcpe men beden to tlie wcddyngis, and
thei woldcn nat cume.

4 Eftsoone he sentc other scruauntiH,

Chap. XXII.

i And Jesus answered
and spake vnto them agaync in simili-
tudes, sayinge,

2 The kyng<lonie of heven is lyke vnto
a certayne kiiige which maryed his
Sonne.

3 And sent forth liis servauntcs to call
them that were l>yd to the wcddinge,
and they woMe nott come.

4 Agcyne he wentt forth other scr-

114

GOTHIC 360.

1

ANGLO-SAXON. 995.

[St. Matt.

1

,-.-M, .1 .,,^ j^elartedon, Nu ! ic gcjrcRr^CKlo
line, mine feamw ami mine fug-
e\an synt ofolc^enc, anil tulle m ne |'iug
syut geanv'C ; cunia|> to duni j^^ftuin.

5 Da for^'yradon hig drct, and ferdon,
'sum to hys tiine, sum to liys mang-
gunge.

6 And da odrc nnnion hys |>eowas, and

mid teouun geswcuctou, and ofsldgon.

7 Da 8C (filing, dwt gehyrde, da wrra
he yrre ; ami sende hys Iktc to, antl
fordyde da munslugan, and I'v • ^'Jrli
forlia-rude.

8 Da cwaj) lie to liys |»oowum, Witml-
I'ce (\im ^yfta synt gearwe/ ac da dc
geliuludo wa-iuii, ne synt wyide.

9 G.i|» mi witudiiie to >\ -

.

elypiaj)

and
clisuni
liwyloe swa ge gemcton.

to

_

,;i tmn,
fcwa

1.

10 Da ctidou da |>io\v;ls ut on da
weuas. and i:e;:adercdon eullc da de hig
gemetti»n, godc and yfele ; aa wirnin
da gyft I1U8 mid sjttyndum mannum
gefylletle.

1

Da code so c}niing in, d.et be wolde
geseon da de daT su'ton ; da geseah lie
dar ai'nm' manu dc ua-s mid gyftlicum
rcafc gescryil.

12 Da cwa'|> he, I^t freond. humrta
eode«t dii in. and ua'fdeat gyftlic real i
Da gcsiiwudc he.

13 And BC cyning cwa»|> to hyx )>«*n<>n,
Gel) nda|> hys handa an*l hys fet, and
wur|»a|> hync on da littnin |>y!»tru ; da-r
by|> wuj> and tt)|>a gristbitung.

14 Witoilliec manega synt geladodc,

and feawa geeorene.^

15 D::
dat hi^
8|>ra?r<' In-fon.

•

^"

'

- '

.

16 Dii sendon hi iniu 1
to, mid dam ll.

cnihtiia
and diis cwanlou, Lareow, we witon d. t
dii cart 86|»fa»8t, and dii lirrcst Go<i< h
weg myd Ko|ifa'8tn}*88e, an<l dii ne wan-l-
ust for nanum menn, ne du uc bc.sccaw-
ast uaues mxmucfl had.

;

3
4
2
1

XXII. 5-T 6.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
seiynge, Seie ^ee to the men beden to
tbe feeste, Loo ! I haue made redy my
mete, my boles and volatilis ben slayn,
and alle thingis redy ; cumme 30 to the
weddyngus.

5 Sothely thei dispisiden,''' and thei
wenten awey, oon in to his vyne^erd,
forsothe an other to his marchaundise.

6 But the other helden his seruauntis,
and slowen hem, ponished with contek.

7 Forsothe the kyng, whenne he hadde
herde, was wroth ; and, his hoostis sente,
he loste"*" the man quellcrs, and brente
her citee.

8 Thanne he seith to his seruauntis,
Sothely the weddyngis ben redy, but
thei that weren clepid to the feeste,
weren nat worthi.

9 Therfore go ^ee to the outgoyngis
of weyes, and whom euere 36 shulen
fynde, clepe to the weddyngis.

10 And his seruauntis, gon out in to
the weyes, gedreden togidre alle that
thei founden, good and yuel ; and the
weddyngis of men sittynge at mete ben
fulfiUid.

11 Forsothe the kyng entride, that

he shulde see men sittynge at mete
and he see^ there a man nat clothid
with brijd cloth is.

12 And he seith to hym, Frend, hou
entridist thou hidir, nat hauynge brijd
clothe 1 And he was doumbe.

13 Thanne the kyng seide to the my-
nystris, His hondis and feet boundcn,
sende ^ee hym into vttermore derk-
])e weepyng and
nessis ;
betyng to gidre of teeth.

there

shal

14 Forsothe many ben clepid, but fewe

TYNDALE, 1526.

115

vauntes, sayinge. Tell them which are
bydden, Lo ! I have prepared my dyn-
ner, myne oxen and my fatlinges are
kylled, and all thinges are redy ; come
vnto the mariage.

5 They made light of it, and went their
wayes, won to his ferme place, another
about his merchandyse.

6 The remnaunt toke his servauntes,
and intreated them vngoodly, and slewe
them.

7 When the kinge herde that, he was
wroth ; and sent forth his warryers, and
distroyed those murtheres, and brent
vppe theire cite.

8 Then sayde he to hys servauntes.
The weddinge was prepared, butt they
which were bydden there to, were not
worthy.

9 Go ye therefore out in to the hye
ways, and as many as ye fynde, byd
them to the mariage.

10 The servauntes went out in to the
wayes, and gaddered togedder as many
as they coulde fynde, booth good and
bad ; and the weddinge was furnysshed
with gestes.

1

The kinge cam in, to viset hys
gestes ; and spyed there a man which
had not on a weddinge garment.

1

And sayde vnto hym, Frende, howe
camyst thou in hydder, and hast not on
a weddyng garment 1 And he was even
spechlesse.

1

Then sayde the kynge to hys minis-
ters. Take and bynde hym hande and
fote, and caste hym into vtter dcrckncs;
there shalbe wepinde and gnassinge of
teth.

For many arc called, and feawe be

1

chosen.

chosen.

15 Thanne Pharisees, goynge awey,
counscile, that thei shulden

token a
take Jliesus in word.

16 And thei senden to hym her dis-
ciplis, witli Erodyanys,^ seiyni^c, Maister,
we witcii, that thou art sotlifast, and
tiiou tecluHt in trcwthc the wcyc of God,
and there is no cure^ to thcc of eny
n'un, for thou bcholdist nat the pcrsoone
of nieu.

15 Then Avent the Fariscs, and toke
counsell, howe they myght tangle him
in his wordes.

16 And sent vnto him there disci-
])les, with Herodes servauntes, sayinge.
Master, we knowe, tliat thou arte true,
and that thou teachest the wayc of God
trueli, nether carest for eny man, for
thou consydrcst nott niennes estate.

I a

iir,

COTfllC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

;

17 Siejfc ufl, hwn?t |)inc)) (\c.

Ys hyt
dlyfcd diut uiiui Caserc gafol sylle, dc
uu?

18 Da 8C Ha'lond hjTa facn ^eliyrdo,
da cwa'[) he, La lIccc'teriiB, liwi faiuligc
ge mill ]

19 yKt-ywuj) me dass gafolea mynj-t.

Da brobtou hi Iiini anne |»cDinc.

20 Da cwa?J» bc Ilaclcnd to hira, llwcea

21

anlicnys ys dis, and dis ofcr^jewrit ?
Jlig cwitdun, Dn?8 Ciiseres.

Da
c\\x\> he, Agj'faj) dam Caserc da jiing
dc dfrs Casyres syut, and Gixle da |>ing
dc Godcs synt.

22 Da hig da't gehyrdon da wundro<l-
on hig ; and forlctou hyne, and fcrdon
oiiweg.

23 On dam d«?gc comon to him Sad-
urei, da sccj^oaj) da't nan stryst ne sy,
and hig acscdou liyne,

24 And cwacdon, Liireow, Mo}-scs sirde,
P}f hwii dead syg, ami htarn ii:i*l»l»e,
diet his brodor nymc hys wif, and strync
hym beam.

25 WitodHce myd us wa'ron seofun
gebn'dru ; and sc fonna fette wif, and
And la:fdc hys ]»rcdcr his
for|>-fcrde.
wif biitan beame

26 *

'

od (1

V r calswa, and bc |>r)-iKla.
, m.

?7 Da a't sidcmcstan, for|>- funic dat

wif.

28 IIi*7lcc9 da^ra sufona by[» dat wif,

on dam irristc ? callc hig ha^fdon hig.

29 Da amlswanxlc w? Hirlen<l hym and
cwa>|», Gc dwelia|>, and nc cunnuu halige
gewritu, nc Godcs ma»gcn.

. 30 Witotlh'cc nc wifia|> hig, nc hig nc
ccorlia|i, on dam Rry'stc ; ac hig syni
8W}'lcc Goilcs cnglaa on hcofone.

31 Nc ncddc gc, l)c dcadni mnnna
a-rystc, dait cow fram Godc gc^^d wnv**,

32 Iccom Abrahamcs God, and Isaacf s
n}*B God na

Gixl, And Inr<>]»cs God ?
dcailra, ac lyl»beudra.

;

^
;

8

;

XXII. 17-32.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

117

17 Tberfore seie to vs, what it semetli
Is it leful to 3eue to Cesar

to thee.
rente ? '''

18 Forsothe, the wickednesse of hem
knowen, Jhesus seith, Ypocritis, what
tempten 5ee me 1

19 Shewe 5ee to me the prynte of the
moneye. And thei offriden to hym a
peny.

20 And Jhesus seith to hem, Whos is

17 Tell vs there fore, howe thynkeste
Is it lawfull to yeve tribute vnto

thou.
Cesar, or not ?

1

Jesus perceaved there wylynes, and
sayde. Why tempte ye me, ye ypocrytes?

19 Lett me se the tribute money.

And they toke hym a peny.

20 And he sayde vnto them. Whose

this ymage, and the wrytyng aboue ?

ys thys ymage, and supersci'ipcion 1

21 Thei seyen to hym, Of Cesar.
Thanne he seith to hem, Therfore 5elde
5ee to Cesar tho thingis that ben Ces-
aris, and to God tho thingis that ben
of God.

22 And thei heerynge wondreden; and,

h}Tn laft, thei wenten awey.

23 In that day Saducees, that seyen
there is no rysyng a3ein, camen ni3 to
hym, and axiden hym,

24 Seyinge, Maister, Moyses seide, ^if
eny man be dead, nat hauynge a sone,
that his brother wedde his wyf, and
reyse seed to his brother.

25 Forsothe seuen bretheren weren at
vs ; and the first, a wijf weddid, is dead.
And he nat hauynge seed, left his wijf
to his brother

2 1 They sayde vnto hym, Cesars. Then
sayde he vnto them, Geve therefore to
Cesar that which is Cesars, and geve
vnto God that which is Goddes.

22 "VMien they herde that they mar-
velled j and lefte hym, and went there
waye.

23 The same daye the Saduces cam
vnto hym, which saye that there is no
resurreccion, and they axed hym,

24 Saynge, Master, Moses bade, if a
man dye, havinge no chyldren, that the
brother mary his wyfe, and reyse vppe
seed vnto his brother.

2 5 There were with vs seven brethren
the fyrst maried, and dyed with out
ysshewe. And lefte hys wyfe vnto hys
brother

26 Also the secoundc, and the thriddc,

26 Lyke wise the seconde, and the

til to the seuenthe.

27 Forsothe the laste of allc, and the

womman is dead.

28 Therefore in the rj'synge

a3ein,
whos wijf of the seuene shal she be 1
for alle hadden hir.

29 Sothely Jhesus answerynge seith to
hem, 3ee erren, nether knowyngc the
scripturis, nether the vertu of God.

30 Forsothe in

the rysyng a3cyn,

neither thei wcdden, nether ben weddid
but thei ben as the aungclis of God in
heucne.

31 Sothely of the rysynge a3cin of
dead men, 3ee ban nat rad, that it is
seid of the Lord, seyinge to 30U,

32 I am God of Abraham, and God of
Ysaac, and God of Jacob ? he is nat
God of deed men, but of lyuyngc men.

thryd, vnto the seventhe.

27 Laste of all, the woman dyed also.

28 Nowe in the resurreccion, whose
wyfe shall she be of the vij 1 for all had
her.

29 Jesus answered and sayde vnto
them. Ye are deceaved, and knowe not
what the scripture meaneth, nor yctt the
vertue of God.

30 For in the resurreccion, they nether
mary, nor arc maryed ; but are as the
angels of God in hevcn.

31 As touchynge the resurreccion off
the deed, have ye nott rcddc, what ys
sayde vnto you off God, which sayc^th,

32 I am Abrahams God, and Ysaaks
God, and the God of Jacob?
(;lod ys
n(»tt the God of the deed, but of the
lyvingc.

I

ll«

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-S.VXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

33 Da dipt
rtflpt
wundredon liij^ liys larc.^

folc

gcliyrdo, da

34 Dii da rimriHciscan pehynlon, d«»t
he het da Saduceifican gtylle bcon, d.i
C(k1oii liig to;^'(ltTC.

35 And an, dc wn*8 drrrc ae lareow,
hys, dus
acsodc
cwcdende,

hync, and

fandodc

36 La lareow, hwtet ys d«t m868t43

belxxl on dicre ac ?

37 Da cwa*}) bc Haulend, Lufa Drihten
dinnc God, on ealre dinrc heortan, and
on ealre dinre sawie, and on eallum
dinum nunle.

38 Dis ys dn?t mapste and daet fSTmcstc

bcbo<l.

39 Odor ys dysnm pclic ; Lufa dlnDC

nilistan swa swji de sylfne.

40 On dysum twam bcbmlum by|>

gcfylled call seo ac.

41 Da da Phariseiscan gegaderodo

wa'ron, da cwa^[) gc Ha^icnd,

42 Hwirt jiincj) cow l)e Criste. hv,tc3

sunu ys he? Hig cwapdon, Danides.

43 Da cwir|> Be Ilaplend, Hwi cl>-pa|>
Drilitcn. and

on giiste

Dauid
cwyj.,

hync

44 Driliton cvrw\t to minuni hrhtrie.
Site on mine s^-ydran lioalfc, o<! dat io
geaetUi dine fynd dc to fot-sooamolo ?

45 Gyf Dauid In-ne on ujiste Dryliten

cly]>a}>, Im ys lie iiys sunu i

46 Da ne niihton hig him nan wonl
nndHwarian, ne nan ne dorste of dam
dttgc, hync nan ))ing mare acsian.

Cnxr. XXTTI

i Da spniv Be Tlirl-
cnd to dam ft»lce, and to hys Iconiing-
cnyhtum,

2 And cwir|», Boccras and Pharisei

sir ton ofor Mo}-se« l.-lrrow srtl.

3 Ilealda)^, and wyrcoa}\ swji Invjrt awa
And ne do ge na afti r
hig Bocgoaji.
hcora worcum ; hig ftecgca)>, and nc d6|>.

4 Hi^ hinda|> hefigc b}Td}Tia, de man
aheran ne niirg, and lecgea|) da uppan

XXII.33--XXIIL4.]WYCLIFFE,i389.

33 And the cumpanyes of peple heer-

ynge, woudreden in liis techynge.

34 Forsothe Pharisees, heerynge that
he hadde put silence to Saducees, camen
to gidre in to oon.

35 And oon of hem, a techer of the

lawe, axede Jhesus, temptynge hym,

36 Maistre, whiche is a greet maunde-

ment in the lawe 1

37 Jhesus seide to hym, Thou shalt
loue the Lord thi
God, of al thin
herte, and in al thi soule^ and in al thi
mynde.

38 This is the firste and the most

maundement.

39 Forsothe the secounde is

to
this; Thou shalt loue thi nei3bore as
thi self.

lie

TYNDALE, 1526.

119
33 And when the people herde that,

they were astonyed at hys doctrine.
34 When the Pharises had herde howe
that he had put the Saduces to silence,
they drewe togedder.
35 And won of them, whych was a
doctour off lawe, axed him a question,
temptinge him, and sayinge,

36 Master, whych is the grett com-

maundment in the lawe ?

37 Jesus sayde vnto him, Thou shalt
love thy Lorde God, with all thyne
herte, wyth all thy soule, and with all
thy mynde.

38 This is the fyrst and that grett

commaundment.
39 And there ys another lyke vnto
thys ; Thou shalt love thyne neghbour
as thy selfe.

40 In these two maundementis hangith

40 In these two commaundmenteshange

al the lawe and prophetis.

all the lawe and the prophettes.

41 Sothely the Pharisees gedrid to

41 Whyll the Pharises were gaddered

gidre, Jhesus axide hem,

42 Seyinge, What semeth to 50U of
Thei seyen to

Crist, whos sone is he 1
hym. Of Dauith.
43 He seith to hem, Therfore hou
clepith hym Lord,
Dauith in
seyinge,
44 The Lord seide to my Lord, Sitte
on my ri3thalf,
that I put thin
enmyes a stole of thi feet?

spirit

til

4.5 Therfore ^if Dauyd clepith him

Lord, hou is he his sone 1

46 And no man mi3t answere a word
to hym, nether eny man was hardy fro
that day, for to axe hym more.

togedder, Jesus axed them,

42 Saynge, What thinke ye of Christ,
They sayde vnto

whose Sonne is he?
hym, The sonne of David.
43 He sayde vnto them, Howe then
doeth David in spirite call him Lorde,
saynge,
44 The Lorde sayde to my Lorde, Sytt
on my ryght honde, tyll I make thyne
cnnemyes thy fote stole ?
45 Yf David call hym Lorde, howe is
he then his sonne 1

46 And none of them coulde answere
him ageyne one worde, nether durstc
eny man from that daye forth, axe hym
eny moo questions.

Chap. XXIII. i Thannc Jhesus spac
to the cumpanyes of peple, and to his
disciplis,

2 Seiynge, Vpon the cliaicr of Moyscs,

BcrihiH and Pharisees seeten.

3 Therfore kepc ^ee, and do 300 alio
thingis, what eucrc thingis thei shulen
But nyl 5ee do after lier
seie to 30U.
wcrkis ; sothely thei scicn, and don nat.
4 Sothely tli(;i hyndcn to grcuouHtt
chargis, and vnportahle,^ and putten in

Chap. XXIII.

i Then spake Jesus

to the people, and to hys disciples,

2 Saynge, The scrybs and the Pharises

sitt in Moses scate.

3 Whatsoever they byd you observe,
that observe, and do.
J hit after tlieir
workes do not ; for they saye, and do
not.

4 Ye and ihey bynde bevy burthens,
and grevcous to be borne, and ley them

\20

GOTUIC, 360.

2
1

ANGLO-SAXON, 995. [St. Matt.

niaiina cxia ; and nclla)> hig da mid
Iicora fingre Kt-hrinan.

r, Eallc hcora wore liij^ d6|>. d.-rt monn
hi^ geseon ; hi« to]>raHUi|) liym heula-
Ihjc/ and inccreiaj) heora rcofu fnadu.

6 II ig lufigca}) da fj-rmcfiUn sotl on
gel>cor8C}7mm, and da fjTmestan larcow-
setl on f^r^

11m ;
lan ^Tuto on stra'tuin,

7 And di»

and d.Tt menn hig larcowiLS ncmn«»n.

8 Nc gyrnc gc da?t cow man lareowaa
ncnmc ; an ys eowcr larcow, gc eyut
calle gcbrodru.

9 And nc ncmne ge cow fabler ofcr
cor|)an, an ys cower fanler, sc de on
hcofonum ys.

10 Nc cow man nc nrr^

'inwas,

fordam an, Crist, is eowir

1

Se de cower y Ideal sy, l>ct» sc cower

J>cn.

1

WItodlice 8c dc h^-nc upp-ilhcf)>, sc
by|> gcnyderod ; and sc dc h^-nc sylfnc
gc-.

" n.t

'

'

'

'

I.*

.;

.^1 rhnrisoi, lic-
cctonis, fordam ge bclucaj) heofona rieo
l)cfomn niannum ; ne gc in nc gii|», nc
gc ne ge|)afiu|) da»t odre ingtm.

U

15 Wa cow, l>6c}Tas antl Pharisoi. lic-
cctcnis, fordam gc lK'funi|' sa^ and eor|>-
iloii anno a»l|HHHlino ; and
an. da«t '^v
d«)iinc he gewonlen hy|», «j
w h\iic
hellc l>cam, twyfoahlHcor d

i

.w.

1^) Wji cow, Itlindan 1'"

goajj, Swft hwylc swii .-<
da t ys nnht ; swa hwii swa 8werc)> on
da» ieiuplos gohle, sc ys scyldig.

,.,

1 7 Eala gc dyscgan and blindan, hwa>d-
'l^'t gold, dc daet tempi
i.ilga|> t

*

^

•^

''

. 18 And swa hwii swa 8wcre|> on dam
wcofuile, dwt ^-s naJit ; swa hwylc swa

;

5
8
3

;

;

XXIII. 5-i8.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

121

to slmldres of men ; but with her fyngir
tbei wolen nat moue hem.

5 Therfore thei don alle her werkis,
that thei be seen of men ; forsothe thei
alargen her filateries/ and magnyfie
hemmys.

6 Sothely thei louen the first sittyng
placis in sopers, and the first chaiers in
synagogis ;

7 And salutaciouns in the chepyng,

and to ben clepid of men maistirs.

8 Sothely nyl ^ee ben clepid maistir

for oon is ^oure maistir, forsothe alle
50 ben brethren.

9 And nyl ^e clepe to 50U a fadir on
erthe, for oon is 30ure fadir, that is in
heucnes,

on mennes shulders ;
but they them
sylfe wyl not move them with one
fynger.

5 All there workes they do, for to be
sene of men ; they sett abroade there
philateris, and make large borders on
there garmenttes.

6 And love to sytt vppermooste at
feastes, and to have the chefe seates in
the synagogges

7 And gretynges in the marketes, and

to be called of men rabi.

8 But ye shall nott suffre youre selves
for one ys youre
to be called rabi ;
master, that is to wytt Christ, and all
ye are brethren.

9 And call ye no man youre father on
the erth, for one is youre father, and he
is in heven.

10 Nether be 5e clepid maistirs, for

10 Be ye not called masters, for one

oon is 30ur maistre, Crist.

ys youre master, and he is Christ.

11 He that is more of 50U, shal be

11 He that is greateste amonge you,

50ure mynystre.

12 Forsothe he that shal hie hym self,
shal be mekid ; and he that shal meeke
hym self, shal ben enhaunsid.

13 Sothely woo to 50U, scribis and
Pharisees, ypocritis, for 50 closen the
kyngdam of heuenes before men ; sothe-
ly 3e entren nat, ne suffre men entrynge
for to entre.

14 Woo to 30U, scribis and Pharisees,
ypocritis, that eten the housis of widucs,
in longe preier preyinge ; for this thing
je shulen take the more dom.

15 Woo to 30U, scribis and Pharisees,
ypocritis, that cumpasen the se and the
lond, that 3ee makcn o prosclite ;^ and
whannc he shal be maad, 30 makcn hym
a sonc of hellc, double more than 30U.

16 Woo to 30U, Ijlyndc lederis, that
Bcien, Who cuerc shal swerc by tlic
temple of God, no thing is ; sothely he
that shal swore in the gold of the temple,
owith.^

17 3cc folis and blyndc, forsothe what
is more, the gold, or the temple that
halowith the gold ?

18 And wlio eucr slial swore in the
but he that shal

autor, no thing is ;

shalbe youre servaunte.

1

12 But whosoever exalteth hym silfe,
shalbe brought lowe ; and he that sub-
mitteth him silfe, shalbe exalted.

Wo be vnto you, scribs and Pharises,
dissemblers, for ye sheet vp the kyng-
dom of heven before men ; ye youre
selves goo nott in, nether suffre ye them
that come to enter in.

14 Wo be vnto you, scribes and Pha-
rises, for ye devoure widdowcs houses,
and that vnder a coloure of praying
longe prayers ; wherfore ye shall receave
greater damnacion.

Wo be vnto you, scribes and Plia-
riscs, ypocrites, for ye compasse see and
londe, to brynge one in to youre belefe
and when ye have brouglit him, ye
make hym two folde more the chyldo
off hell, then ye youre selves are.

16 Wo ]jo vnto you, blynd gidcs, for
ye saye, Whosoever swcure l)y the tcm-
plc, yt ys nothingc ; but whosoever
Hwoarc by the goldc of the temple, he is
detter.

1

17 Ye folcs and blindo, whether is
greater, the golde, or the temple that
sanctifyeth the goldo ]

1

aultt'i-,

And whosoever sweareth by the
is nothingc ; but whosoever

it

122

GOTUIC, 360.

9

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

wcrrj) 01)
WCofiKl yg,

"*

"^ m^e de ofer dapt

_

_r.

1

I^nla ge blindan, hweder ys mare,
(1e oflTninjr, c!e dvci wcofod de gchaljya|»
da (jfTrunj^e ?

20 Wito<lHce 8C dc swerc)) on wcofixlc,
lie sworcj) on him, and on eallum dam
dc him ofcr synt.

21 And se dc swcre|» on temple, ho
swerej) on him, and on dam dc him on-
cardiaj).

'

f

22 And 8C de sweraj) on heofonan, he
fiwcry|) on Goilea j^nTn-sctlc, and on
dam dc ofyr <^

23 Wa cow,
and Pharisei. lic-
ceteras, ge dc tcodia|> mintan, and dilc,
and cumyn, and p^e forlrton da j^inc: dc
synt hefi<;cran dare tr, dom, and nuM-
heortnysse. and gelcafun.
i)us |»ini; hyt
t;c])}Tedc daet ge dydon, and da odre ne
forlcton.

24 L.i blindan latteowaR, pe drehnijyeal*
done fj^iitvi nwep, and drinca|> done olfend.
1 riiarisri. I1V-

25 Wa r.
cetcnw, foil
^^•'''^ ^*''*1^'t^*o
j's, caliceaa and discas ; and pe 8\-nt in-
nan fulle reaflaccs and uncltcnnyssc.

t'

'

'

26 Eala du hlinda Phariseus, cla'iiMi
a'rvRt da»t widinnan }*8 ealiees and disccs,
d.-it hyt 81 cla-ne daH wiiliitan ya.

27 Wii cow, Iwceras and Pharisiei, lic-
ceteni5, fordnm pe synt prlioe hwitum
l)>Tpennm, da |inrea|> niannum
litan
wlitipp ; and hig gynt innan fullc de-
adra Iwina, and ealre fyl|*c.

2S An<l Rwa gc etywa)* mannum litan
rilitwise ; innan gc 8}-nt fullc liccctunge
and unrihtwisncsse.

29 Wa cow. l>6cora« and Phansci, lic-
oeieraa, gc de timl)na|> wiiegena 1\^tl:-
ena, and glcnLra|> rihtwinm genniul-
Btowa,

30 And gc cwedaj*. Oj^" wc wwron on

^'-

' -

'

r.~

t-

'ron we !
I bltHle>

31 Witoillicc gc gynt cow sylfum to
gewitnyfwe, dR»t gc synt d^ra hearn de
ofslogon da witegan.

1

;

XXIII. 19-31.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

123

swere in the 5ifte that is on the auter,
owith.

sweareth by the offeringe that lyeth on
the aultre, ys detter.

19 Blynde men, forsothe what is more,
the 5ift, or the auter that halowith the
5ifte ?

20 Forsothe he that swerith in the
auter, swerith in it, and alle thingis that
ben theron.

2

And he that swerith in the temple,
swerith in it, and in hym that dwellith
in the temple.

22 And he that swerith in heuene,
swerith in the trone of God, and in hym
that sittith theron.

23 Woo to 50U, scribis and Pharisees,
ypocritis, that tithen mente, anete, and
comyn, and han lefte tho thingis that
ben greuouser^ of the lawe, dora, and
mercy, and feith. And these thingis it
behofte^ for to do, and not to leeue
hem.

24 Blynde leders, clensynge a gnatte,

but swolowynge a camel.

25 Woo to 50U, scribis and Pliarisees,
ipocritis, that maken clene that thing of
the cuppe and plater, that is with out-
forth ] forsothe with ynne ^e ben ful of
raueyne and vnclennesse.

26 Thou blynd Pharisee, dense first
that thing of the cuppe and plater that
is with ynnefortli, that and that thing
that is with outenforth be maad clene.

27 Woo to 50U, scribis and Pharisees,
ipocritis, that ben lie to sepulcris maad
whijt, the whiche with outen forth semen
fuire to men ; sothely with ynne thei ben
ful of boonys of dead men, and al filthe.
28 So and 300 forsothe with outen
forth apercn iustc to men ; but with
ynne ^ee ben ful of ypocrisie and wickid-
nesse.

29 Woo to 50U, scribis and Pharisees,
ij)Ocritis, that beldcn sepulcris of pro-
phetis, and maken faire the l)irielis of
iuste men,

>o And scien, 3if we hudden ben in
of our fadris, we sliulden
the daycs
nat lian ]>e here felowis in the l>loo(l of
I)njphetis.

>r And 80 ^e ben in witnensyiif^' to yni
If, for 3c ben the sonys of hem that

slowen the proplictis.

19 Ye foles and blinde, whether is
aultre

greater, the
whych sanctifyeth the offeringe ?

offeringe, or the

20 Whosoever therfore sweareth be
the aultre, sweareth bi it, and by all
that there on is.

21 And whosoever sweareth by the
temple, sweareth by it, and by hjm. that
dwelleth there in.

22 And he that sweareth by heven,
sweareth by the seate of God, and by
hym that sytteth thereon.
23 Wo be to you, scrybes and Pha-
rises, desemblers, for ye tythe mynt,
annys, and commen, and leave
the
waygthtyer mattres of the lawe ondone,
iudgement, mercy, and fayth.
These
ought ye to have done, and not to have
lefte the otlire ondone.

24 Ye blinde gydes, which strayne out

a gnat, and swalowe a cammyll.
25 Wo be to you, scrybes and Pharises,
ypocrites, for ye make clene the vtter
side off the cuppe and off the platter
but with in they are full of brybery and
excesse.

26 Thou blynde Pharise, dense fyrst
that which is with in the cuppe and the
platter, that the outsyde maye also be
clene.
27 Wo be to you, scrybes and Pharises,
ypocrites, for ye are lyke vnto paynted
tombes, which appere beautyfuU out-
wardes ; but are with in full off deed
mens bones, and of all fylthynes.

28 So are ye, for outwardes ye appere
rightous vnto men ; when with in ye
are full of dissimulacion and iniquite.

29 Wo be vnto you, scribes and Plia-
rises, ypocrytes, ffor ye bilde the tombes
prophetes, and ganiisshe the
off the
sepulchres off iustc men,
. 30 And saye, Yf we had bene in ourc
fathers tymc, we wolde not have bene
partners with them in the bloud of tho
prophftes.

31 So are ye witnesses vnto yourc
seivcH, that ye are th« children of them
wliich killed the prophetes.

\2i

LiOTIIlC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

32 And gcfyllc gc dat gemct cowti

fin 1 era.

33 Enlii ^c nxcddrnn, and nnnldrena
cynn, hu flco gc fram hcllc donicl^

34 Ic sonde to cow witojjan, and wi»c

]»<K'onLS ; and ^'C hi;; of>lra|>. mul 1
and 8win;;a|> f»n cowruni grsoiMnuni^uiii,
and gc big chta)> of byrig on b)Tig ;

'•.

35 Diet ofer cow cumc aclc

rilitwis
Mod, (1c wipg ajjoton ofer cor[>nn, fnini
Alleles blodc dn^ rihtwisnn <m1 Zach
arias blod, I^rachios suna, done ^'e of
slo^on l>ctw)'x dam t€n)])le
and dam
wef)fodc.

36 S6|> ic cow secge, ealle das |>ing

cumnj) ofer das cncorissc.

37 Eala Icrusalcni, cala Icnisalem/ du
de da wite^n ofslihst. and mid st^iuinm
oftorfast da de to dc ascndc synt, swidc
ic woKlc dine beam pej^derii^'an,
oft
8wa SCO henn Ijjtc cieenu nntler byro
fydrrr,

ra|», and dii noldest,

3H WiMHii.c mi! by|» cower bus cow

westc forla'ten.

39 St')|>

me b<
Sy p«
naman.

ic scope cow, nc ;;oseoj'

j;.

*"

',»m de pe -
com on 1

1,

^

ClfAP. XXIV.

I And da so TTa'lend
ut-o«KK' of dam tomjile ; bim to-prnea
lii bim
In'bton bvR Iconr
irtywdon da>8 teii._

r^r.

'

!

•'

*

2 Da andsworodc be bim a::! <\\ri!<,
Gc«co|» pc call dial St'»|i ic s'-^-
<<'w.
ne by)" ber Isfcd stan uppan stane, de
nc beo toworpcn.

3 Da be 8wt uppan Oliuotos diino, da
comon b}*s Icoming-onibtas dililire. and
cwa'don, StcfTC iw, bwa»nnc d.Is
}^inp
pcwunlon, and bwj-lc
tacn si dines
tocymos. and wondde pc-cntbmpe,

4 Da andswarode be bim and c^a*}*.

Wamiajt, da;t cow nan uc U^wicc.

;

;

XXIIL32.-XXIV.4.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

125

32 And 5e fulfillen the mesure of 3oure

32 Fulfyll ye lyke wyse the measure

fadris.

33 ^ee sarpentis, fruytis''" of eddris,^
flee fro the dom of

hou shulen ^ee
helle ?

34 Therfore loo !

I sende to 50U pro-
phetis, and wise men, and scribis ;^ and
of hem 5ee shulen slee, and crucifie,
and of hem ^e shulen bete in 5our syna-
gogis, and shulen pursue fro citee in to
citee

35 That al the iuste blode come vpon
50U, that was shed on the erthe, fro
the blood of iust Abel til the blood of
Zacharie, the sone of Barachie, whom
5ee slowen bitwixe the temple and the
auter.

36 Trewli I seie to 50U, alle these
thingis shulen come vpon this genera-
cioun.

37 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that sleest
prophetis, and stonyst hem that ben
sent to thee, hou oft wold I gedre to
gidre thi sonys, as an henne gedreth
togidre hir chikenys vndir hir wengis,
and thou woldist nat.

38 Loo ! 50ure hous shal be lefte to

50U desert.'''

39 Forsothe I seie to 30U, ^ee shulen
nat see me fro hennys forth, til that ^ee
seien, Blessid is Ae, that cumeth in the
name of the Lord.

of youre fathers.

33 Ye serpentes, and generacion of
vipers, howe shall ye scape the damp-
nacion of hell ?
34 Wherfore beholde! Y sende vnto
you prophetes, wyse men, and scribes ;
and off' them some shall ye kyll, and
crucifie, and some shall ye scourge in
youre synagogges, and persecute from
cite to cite

35 Thatt all righteous bloud may fall
on you, which was sheed apon the erth,
from the bloud of rightous Abell vnto
the bloud of Zacharias, the sonne of
Barachias, whom ye slewe betwene the
temple and the altre.
36 Verely Y say vnto you, all these
thill ges shall light apon this genera-
cion.

37 Hierusalem, Hierusalem, which kyll-
est prophetes, and stonest them which
are sent to the, howe often wolde I have
gaddered thy children to gedder, as the
henne gaddreth her chickens vnder her
wynges, but ye wolde not.

38 Beholde ! youre habitacion shalbe

lefte vnto you desolate.
39 For Y saye vnto you, ye shall not
se me hence forth, tyll that ye saye.
Blessed ys he, that commeth in the
name off" the Lorde.

Chap. XXIV. i And Jhesus, gon out
of the temple, wente ; and his disciplis
camen ni3 to hym, that thei shulden
sliewe to hym the bildyngis of the

Chap. XXIV. i And Jesus went out,
and departed from the temple ; and his
disciples cam to hym, for to shcwe hym
the byldinge of the temple.

teii)i)lc.

2 Forsothe he answerynj^'c seith to
hem, Seen 3ee alle these thingis 1 Trewly
I seie to 30U, a stoon shal nat be lefte
here on a stoon, the whiclie shal nat be
di.stniyc<l.

.; Sothely hym fiittynge on the hil of
Ulyucte, disciplis camen ni3 to
liini
priuely, seiynge, Seie to vs, whanne ihcs
thingis Kchulen be, and what tokenc of
thi coniyng(!, and of cn<ling of the world.
4 And Jljc.^us answ(;ringe scidc to hem,

So 30, that no man disccyuc 30U.

2 Jesus sayde vnto them, Se ye not
Verely Y saye vnto
all these thinges 1
you, there shall not be here leeft one
stone vppon another, that shall not be
destroyed.

3 And as he sat vppon the mount
Olivete, his discijjlcs cam vnto hym
sayinge, Tell vs, when this
secretly,
shalbe, and wliat signc shalbe of thy
commiTige, and of the ende of the worlde.
4 And JesuH answered and sayde vnto
them, Take hedc, that no man desceavc
you.

I

12G

CiOTUlC, 360.

1

;

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
5 Mane^ cuma)> on minum -
aiul

Ic com Crust ;

cwcili|>,

;.

[St. Matt.

8wica|> nmiiega.

6 Wit4><l'-

1,t. and
pcfeohU I
I ^;e ne
boon p^edrefetle ; (Ua |>inir sceolon ge-
weorduu, oc uys doin

,.

^

le.

^

:

onf^'cii

7 peod win|> ongen f>c<Kle, and nee
rice, and iiiunn-cweHlmas Ik*o|\
and hun<,mi8, wide geoud laud, and eorf
an styninga ;

8 I'^allc das \>mg gynt da?ra sara an

ginnu.

9 Uonne 8ylla|> hi cow on Ke<lrcfetl
nysse, and of8lea|) cow, and eallc menu
eow hatigea|> for minum naman.

10 And donne beo|» mane^ unj^
i|> betwyx him, and
n.

trj'wsode, an. I
hutiga}) him l.v ;

'

1

And mane;,'a lease witegan cunia}\

and I)e8wica|» manei^Ti.

12 And furdiun i1c unrihtHisnys ric8a|>,

manegra lufu aoula}»

13 WitfKlHce se do |>urhwuna[> od cnde

se l>y}i liui.

14 And dis pc)<lsi>el by|> bo<lod ofer
ealle et>r}>an, on pewitnesse eallum }>c
odum ; and dunne eym|» seo gc-endung.

I/; Donne ge gcseo}) da onj»oiH»ni

d.iTe towor|H*nnyj>8e, de »c wit-
cwR»|», Daniel, da he stod on
stowe ; ong}tc, se de hyt rwt ;

16 Fleon donne to miintum. da do on

ludea-hinde synt ;
17 And se de p up|tan hys l»u!i*\ no
ga he nydrr dxt he a'nij fing on his
hiise fecti-

18 Ant I

-^

da«t he \i\ -

le, uc cyrre he

;. . ...o.

19 ^^tt t.i. :..;.. lum und fcdendum on

dam daguui.

30 Bichlaji, da^t eower fleam on wintra,

oddo on re«te-<la-gc, nc gewe<irde.

2 1 Wftotlh'ec donne by|> swa mycel ge-
deorf, swa noss of midiku-geardes frumao

3
2
1

;
;

;

;

;

2

;

;

XXIV. 5-21.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
5 Many schulen come in my name,
seyynge, I am Crist ; and thei schulen
disceyue manye.

6 Sothly 5e ben to heere bateyls, and
opynyouns of bateyls ; se ^e, that ^e ben
not distroblid ; forsoth it bihoueth thes
thingis to be don, but not 5it is the
ende.

7 Folk schal ryse to gidere a5en folk,
and rewme in to rewme, and pestilencis,
and hungris, and erthemouyngis schulen
be by placis

TYNDALE, 1526.

127
5 For many shall come in my name,
sainge, Y am Christ j and shall deceave
many.

6 Ye shall heare of warres, and of the
noyse of warres ; but se, that ye be not
for all these thinges muste
troubled ;
come to passe, but the ende is not yet.

7 For nacion shall ryse ageynste nacion,
and realme ageynste realme, and there
shalbe pestilence, and honger, and erth-
quakes in all quarters 3

8 Forsothe alle thes thingis ben bigyn-

8 All these are the beginnynge off

nyngis of sorwis.

sorowes.

9 Thenne thei schulen bitake 50U in to
tribulacioun, and thei schulen slee 50U,
and 3e schulen be in hate to alle folkis
for my name.

10 And thanne manye schulen be
sclaundrid, and to gidere bitraye/ and
in hate haue to gidere.

11 And many false prophetis schulen

ryse, and disceyue many.

1

And for wickidnesse schal be plen-
teous, the charite of manye schal wexe
coold

9 Then shall they put you to trouble,
and shall kyll you, and ye shalbe hated
off all nacions ffor my names sake.

10 And then shall many fall, and shall
betraye won another, and shall hate won
the other.

11 And many falce prophetes shall

aryse, and shall deceave many.

1

And because iniquite shall have the
vpper hande, the love of many shall
abate

Forsothe he that schal dwelle stable

1

J 3 But he that endureth to the ende,

vnto the ende, he this schal be saaf.

14 And this gospel of kyngdom schal
be prechid in al the world, in to witness-
inire to alle folkis ; and thanne the ende
schal come.

15 Therfore whenne ^e schulen se the
abhomynacioun of discomfort, thai is
seid of Danyel, the prophete, stondynge
in the hooly place ; he that redith, vndir-
Btonde

16 Thanne thei that ben in Judee, fle

to mounteyns

17 And he that is in the hous roof,
come not down to take ony thing of his
hous

18 And he that in in the fecld, turnc

not a3en to take his coote.

19 Forsoth wo to wymmen with childe

and noryschinge in tho daycs.

20 Sothly preie 30, that 30ure flcyngc

be not maad in wyntir, or saboth.

2

Forsothe thanne schal be greet tri-
bulacioun, what mancr was not fro the

shalbe safe.

14 And this gospell off the kyngdom
shalbe preached in all the worlde, for a
witnes vnto all nacions ; and then shall
th« ende come.

15 When ye then shall se the abomi-
nacion and desolacion, spoken of by
Daniell, the prophet, stonde in the holy
let hym
place ; whosoever redeth it,
vnderstonde it

16 Then let them which be in lury,

flye into the mountaynes ;

17 And lett hym whycli is on the
housse toppe, not come doune to take
cnytingc out of his housse ;

18 Nether let hym which is in the
felde, returne backe to fctche his clothes.
19 Wo be in those duyos to them that
are with chyldc and to tlicni tluit gcvc
sucke.

20 J>utt praye, thatt yourc flyght be
not in the winthcr, netlier on tlie saboth
dayc.

21 For then slialbe greatc

tribula-
cion, suclie us was not from the begin-

I

\2H

GOTHIC, 360.

;

.

ANGLO SAXOX, 90^
ot! (lis. nc nu nc gewcor|\

[St. Matt.

22 Ami hiitoii da dnfjna ffcsrvrtc waljr-

011, ijsurc nan munn iiul j^cwonKn .
for dam gecorcnum, do he geccas, d.i
dagas bco|> gescyrtc.

n<

23 Dunne g}f cow hwu rtp^'I^. Xu '
Crist }-8 her, odde dar, nc gtlyfe i;.
him.

24 Donne cuma|» lease T''

1

lea«e wltegan, and (lo}» njyt..
f6re-])eacn ; da^t da l>co|» on gedwolan
gclacdde, gyf hyt beon ma?g, de gecurcn«
wacron.

I

25 Witodlicc ! ic hyt cow foresacde.
26 Gyf liig eow 8ecgea|', Her he ys on
- -'

westene, nc fare ge ut ; gyf l" '
Her he ys on |)urli-funin, nc

-

27 Witodlice swa swa liget frrrl^ fr ti
cst-daele, and a»tyw|) od wcst-daM, >.s.»
by)> mannes suua tocyme.

a8 Swa hwrrr Rwil hold l)y)>.

(1;n]» r

beoji eania8 g<'gadero<h'.

29 Sona a'ftcr darn <liiga gc«in tul-
nessc, SCO sunne by[> forsworeen, and se
mona hys Icoht no 8yl[», and 8te<»rmn
fealla|> of dare heofcnan, and dare heof-
enau magcuu beoj) iwtyrcdc.

30 And donnc n?tyw|) mannes snna
tacn on hcofonnn, and donne wrpaji
ealle eorjmn mTrg|»a ; and gi^seoj) man-
nes 8unu cumendne^ on heofonan genijv
um,* mid myclum magene and magcn-
)>rymme.
31 And he ascnt hys engla<« mid bym-
an, and mycclre stcfne ; and hi lT' i»d-
erigajt hys gecorenan of feowcr »•
cardes endum, of heofona heal.
od hyt

i*ru.
-^**»^ bigspel Ih? dam fic-
3^ ^-»
Donne hys twig l.y|» hncsoe,
treowe.
and leaf acennedc, gc witon, dat sumor
yg grhende ;

- -

33 And witc ge swa, dtmno ge das
|»ing gc8Co|>, dat he yn on durum ge-
hendc.

'

'

.

34 '^*»|» ic Boogc eow, diet deos cneorys
no gcwit, aerdara dc calle das ))ing gc-
weonlon

;

;

;

;

XXIV. 2 2-34.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;
!

129

bigynnyng of the world to now, nethir
schal be maad.

22 And no but tho dayes hadden be
breggid, al fleisch"'' sehulde not be maad
saaf j but tho dayes schulen be maad
schort, for the chosun men.

23 Thanne if ony man schal seie to
50U, Lo ! here is Crist, or there, nyle 36
bileue.

24 Forsothe false Cristis and false pro-
phetis schulen ryse, and thei schulen
33rue grete tokenes and wondris ; so that
also the chosyne be ledd in to errour, if
it may be don.

25 Lo ! I haue bifore seid to 50U.
26 Therfore if thei schulen seie to 50U,
Loo ! he is in desert, nyle 5e go out ;
loo ! in pryuey chambris,"'' nyle ^e bileue.

27 Sothli as leyt goth out fro the eest,
and apperith til in to the west, so schal
be and the comynge of mannus sone.

28 Where euere the body schal be, and

nynge off the worlde to this tyme, ner
shalbe.

22 Ye and except those dayes shulde

be shortened, shulde no flesse be saved
butt for the chosens sake, those dayes
shalbe shortened.

23 Then yff eny man shall saye vnto
you, Lo ! here is Christ, or there is
Christ, beleve it not.

24 Ffor there shall arise falce Christes
prophetes, and shall geve
and falce
greate signes and wonders ; so greatly
that yff it were possible, even the chosen
shulde be brought in to erroure.

25 Take hede ! I have tolde you before.
26 Yflf they shall saye vnto you, Lo

he is in the desert, go not forth ; yff
they saye, lo ! he is in the secret places,
beleve nott.

27 For as the lightnynge cometh out
off the eest, and shyneth vnto the weest,
so shall the commynge off the sonne of
man be.

28 For wheresoever a deed body is,

the eeglis schulen be gederid thidur.

even thyther wyll the egles resorte.

29 Forsothe anoon aftir the tribula-
cioun of tho dayes, the sunne schal be
maad derk, and the mone schal not ^yue
hir li^t, and sterris schulen falle down
fro heuene, and the vertues of heuenes
schulen be mouyd.

30 And thanne the tokene of mannus
sone schal appcre in heuene, and thanne
alle kynredis^ of erthe schulen weyle
and thei schulen se mannus sone com-
ynge in the clowdis of heuene, with
moche vertu and magestc.
31 And he schal sende his angelis with
a tnimpc, and greet voice ; and thei
schulen gedere his chosyne fro fourc
ivyndis of heuene, fro the hi3cstc thingis
oi heuenes til teermes^ of hem.
32 Lcme 3c the parable of a fyge tree.
Whcnnc his bou3^ is now tcndrc, and
eeuys sprungcn, 3ce witen, that somcr
is Di3
33 So and 306 whcnnc 3CC shulcn sc
Ule these thingis, witith that it is ni3,
ind in the 3atiH.
34 Trcwly I seie to 3o\v, for this gcnc-
"acioun shal nat passe, til
alle
ihingis be don

that

29 Immediatly after the tribulacions
off those dayes, shall the sun be derken-
eth, and the mone shall not geve her
fall from
light, and the starres shall
heven, and the powers of heven shall
move.

all the kynreddes of the

30 And then shall appere the sygne of
the Sonne off man in heven, and then
erth
shall
morne ; and they shall se the sonne of
man come in the cloudes of heven, with
power and glycate maieste.

31 And he shall sende his angcllcs
with the greate voyce of a tromp ; and
they shall gadder to gcdthcr his chosen
from the fowcr wyndcs, and from the
one cnde off the worlde to the other.

32 Learne a similitude of the fygge
tree. When his braunchcs are yet tender,
and his leves sprongc, yc knowc, that
sommer is nye ;

33 So lyke wysc when yc sc all these
thynges, be yc sure that it is neare, even
at the (lores.

34 Vcrely T saye vnto you, thatt this
gcncracion sliiill not passe, tyll all bo
fulfilled

130

aoTiiic, 3r,o.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

1

,

;

35 Hcofonc anfl •

Hco mine word ii»

' - ijewitiij», witod-

j).

36 Nat nan mann be dani dn%'c ne
be (liere tide, ne furdan engla^, buton
Cteder ana.

37 Witodlice swa 8wa on N6e« dasrutn

waes, 8wa by|) mannes suna toc^-mc.

38 Swa bi waeron, on dam dnfjum «r
ttani flode, ett-nde and drinceiulr. and
wiligendc and gj'fta nyllcndc, od done
dicg, dc Noc on da earce eodc ;

39 And 111 nvBton,* irr da-t (lod com,
and nnni big culle, swu by)> luunucs suiiu
toc^-me.

40 Donne beo|) twogcn on ipoere, an

by|) gcnumen, and odcr byj» lacfcd ;

4

Twa beoj) (et c^'}Tnc gnn<lendc, an

by|) genumen, an<l
twcir'n '"
and odcr i

.

6<1er

l»y|»

Isrfed

U% an by|> genumeu,

42 Waciga}) w

f.mlain do i^o
nylon on bwyb^.v i.-.^ towtr Illaford
cunian ^•ylc.

43 Wita|>, dwt g>f se blrciles caldor
wiste on bwylcerc tide so \*eo[ tow»anl
wai^ro, wit(Mllice be woltb' \vaoi;;«an. and
noble go|)afigau* da»t man liy.s
bii.s un-
dcrdulfc.

44 And fordiim l)oo go geanvo, fonlam
de mannes sunu wyle cuman, on dare
tiile do tjo nyton.

4f, Wt-nst dii bwa sy gotrywo and
gb^aw |>eow, done geset bys bliifonl ofor
bis bired, diet be bim on tide mote
syllc f

46 Kadig^ ya ac |*ow, dc bys bblford

byne gemet dua dc'ndne, donne be c^m

H
47 So|) ic cow acogc, dn't «»for call d«t

be ab be bjnic goa<>t.

4« (Jyf f»c yfoln \h <
boortan and rwvl'. M
bys cyme.

40 And ;>,-\
and vt iiiitl »li

' Ton |'0(«wai^

.

, jiiiiii

50 Donne cym|) il»s wta!t> blaford <m

XXIV.35-50] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

131

;

35 Heuene and erthe sliulen passe, but

my wordis sliulen nat passe.
36 Forsothe of tliilk day and hour no
man woot, nether angelis of heueues, no
but the fadir alone.

37 Forsothe as it was in the dayes of
Noye, so shal be and the comyng of
mannes sone.

38 For as in the days bifore the grete
flood, thei weren etynge and drinkynge,
weddynge and takynge to weddynge, til
in to that day, in the whiche Noe eutride
in to the ship ;
39 And thei knewen nat, til that the
grete flood came, and toke alle men, so
shal be the cummyng of mannes sone.

40 Thanne two shulen be in a feeld,
con shal be taken to, and an other
left;^

41 Two vjymrmn shulen be gryndynge
in 00 querne, oon shal be taken to, and
the other forsaken ; two in 00 bed, the
toon shal be taken to, and the tother
forsaken.

42 Therfore wake 3ee, for ^ee witen
to.

nat in what houre 50ure Lord is
cumme.

43 Sothely that thing wite ^ee, for ^if
the housbonde man wiste in what houre
the theef were to cumme, trewly he
ehulde wake, and suffre nat his hous to
be vndinnynyd.

44 And therfore and 3ee be redy, for in
what hour ^ee gessen nat, mannes sone
is to cumme.
45 Who gessist thou is a trew seruaunt
and prudent,^ whom his lord ordcynyde
on his meynee, that he 3cue to hem
mete in tyme ?

46 Blissid 18 that seruaunt, whom his
lord, whenne he shal cumme, shal fynde
doynge so.

47 Trewly I seie to 30U, for vpon alle

his goodis he shal ordcyne hym.

48 Forsothe 3if
tliilk yucl seruaunt
•hul Hcic in his hcrtc. My lord makith
dwcllyngc^ to cum,

49 Atul big}'nnc to smyte liis cucn
scniauntis, sothely ^if lie etc and drynke
with drunkoTilewo men ;

o The lord of thilk seruaunt shal

I

-^^ Heven and erth shall perisshe, but

my wordes shall abyde.
36 But of that daye and houre knowith
no man, no not the angels of heven, but
my father only.

37 As the tyme of Noe was, so lyke
wyse shall the commynge of the sonne
off man be.

38 For as in the dayes before the floud,
they dyd eate and drynke, mary and
were maried, even vnto the daye, that
Noe entred in to the shyppe

39 And knewe of nothynge, tyll the
floude cam, and toke them all awaye, so
shall also the commynge off the sonne
off man be.

40 Then two shalbe in the feldes, the
one shalbe receaved, and the other shalbe
refused ;

41 Two shalbe gryndinge at the myll,
the one shalbe receaved, and the other
shalbe refused

42 Wake therefore, because ye knowe
nott what houre youre Master wyll
come.

43 Off this be sure, that yff the good
man off the housse knewe what houre
the thefe wolde come, he wolde suerly
watche, and not suffre his housse to be
broken vppe.

44 Therfore be ye also redy, for what
houre ye tinke leest on, in the same
shall the sonne of man come.
45 Who is a faythfuU servaunte and
wyse, whom his master hath made ruler
over his housholde, ffor to geve them
meate in season convenient ?
46 IIai)i)y is that scrvaunt, whom hys
master, when he cometh, shall finde so
doingc.
47 Verely Y saie vnto you, he shall
make him ruler over all his goodes.

48 But and yf the cvyll scrvaunt sliall
saye in his hcrte. My master wyll diller
his commynge,

49 And bt'gynn to smyte his fclowos,
ye and to cute and to drynke with the
(Ironkcn ;

50 That scrvuuntcs master wyll como

K 2

\:v2

HOT I lie, 360.

2

;

;

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

tlani (Inpgc dc he na uc weu)>, aiul on
ilarc title dc lie nat,

51 And todacl|» hync, and ai*ct hys dscl
iny«l liicctcruin ; da;r by|> wop, and to|»a
l^^rUtbitung.

Chap. XXV.^ i Donne l.y^ !. .f.na
rice gelic dum tyn facmnuni, dc iLi i<-«'l»t-
fatu nainou, and ferilon ongcn done
brydguniau and da brydc

2

Ilyra

fif wacron

dysigc, and fif

glcawe.

3 Ac da fif d\*scgan namon Icolit-falu,
and ne namon nanne cle mid hym ;

4 Oa glcawan namon ele on liyra fatum

mid dam 1'
5 Da sc 1

'

"^

' mi.

.

-,

ill ylde, da hnnppo<lon

hig ealle and slepon.

6 Witoillicc

hrymdc and cwnp|», Nii !
cym|>, fara|> him togcnes.

to miiMcre nilito man
sc brytlguma

7 Da arj'son calle da fscmnan, and

glengdon heora leoht-fatu,
8 t)a cwccdon da d}'8egan to dam
wisum, Sylla|> us of eowrum cle, fordain
lire leoht-f. '
9 Da ail

t acwoncto.
Ion da glcawan, and
cwa?don, Nese, dela^i de we and ge
nabbon gem'li, ga|> to dam cypcnduin,
and byoga|> eow cle.

10 AVito«Ilice da hig ferdon and woldon
bycgean, da com sc bryilgtima ; aiul da
de gearwc wscron, coilon in miil him to
dam g)-ftimi ; and sec duru wn^ beloccn.
J 1 Da n?t-nch8tan comon da odre fa'm-
nan, and cwadon, Dryht}Ti, drjhtyn,
la't us in.

}>a andswarodc ho hoom and cw.t|»,

1

S6|> ic
13 W

•

•

>w.
: im do ge

nyton ne done dR»g no da tide .

.

.

14 Sum man fcnlc on cl|)Cotlinysse,
h}-8 [HH)waa, and bcta'hto

and ely|)o«lc
hym hys vhta

15 And anum he sealde

fif pvlnd.

;

2

XXIV.51.-XXV.15.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

133

cume in the clay in whiche he hopith
nat, and in hour that he knowdth nat,

51 And shal departe hym, and put
his part with ypocritis ; there shal be
weepynge, and betynge togidre of teeth.

in a daye when he loketh not for hym,
and in an houre that he is not ware of,

51 And wyll devyd hym, and geve
hym his rewarde weth ypocrites ; there
shalbe wepinge, and gnasshinge of tethe.

Chap. XXV. i Thanne the kyngdam
of heuenes shal be lie to ten virgynys,
the whiche^ takynge her laumpis, wente
out meetynge the spouse/ and the
spousesse ;*"

2 Forsothe fyue of hem weren foolis,

Chap. XXV.

i Then the kyngdom
of heven shalbe lykened vnto x virgins,
which toke their lampes, and went to
mete the brydgrom j

2 Fyve of them were folysshe, and fyve

and fyue prudent.

were wyse.

3 But the fyue foolis, her laumpis taken,

token nat oyle with hem ;

4 Forsothe the prudent token oyle in

her vessels with laumpis.

5 Forsothe the spouse^ makynge dwell-

ynge, alle nappiden and slepten.

6 Sothely at myd ni^t a cry was maad,
Loo ! the spouse cummeth, go 366 out
metyngc to hym.

3 The foles toke their lampes^ but toke

none oyle with them ;

4 But the wyse toke oyle with them
in their vysselles with their lampes also.
5 Whyll the brydgrome taryed, all

slorabred and slepte.

6 And even at mydnyght there was a
the brydgrome

crye made, Beholde !
commeth, goo and mete hym.

7 Thanne alle the virgynys rysen vp,

7 Then all those virgins arose, and

and anoumeden her laumpis.

prepared their lampes.

8 Sothely the foolis seiden to the wise,
5eue 5ee to vs of ^oure oile, for oure
laumpis ben qwcnchid.

9 The prudent answcreden, seyinge,
Lest perauenturc it suffise nat to us and
to 50U, go 5ee rather to men scllynge,
and bye to 30U.

10 Forsothe the while thci wcnten for
to bye, the spouse came ; and tho that
weren redy, entriden in with hym to
the weddyngis ; and the 3atc is shit.

11 Sothely at the last and the other
virgynys camen, seyinge. Lord, lord,
opcnc to vs.

12 And he answcryngc scith, Treuly I

seic to 30U, I knowc nat 30U.

13 And 80 wake 3CC, and prcyc, for

jcc witcn nat the day no the hour

.

14 Sothely as a man goyngc fer in
pilgrimage, clej)idc liis seruauntis, and
bitokc to hem his goodia

15 And to con he 3auc fyue taicntis,^

8 And the folysshe sayde to the wyse,
Geve vs of youre oyle, for oure lampes
goo out.

9 But the wyse answered, sayinge, Not
so, lest there be not ynought for vs and
you, but goo rather to them that sell,
and by for youre selves.

10 In conclusion whyll they went to
bye, the brydgrom cam ; and they that
were redy, went in with hym to the
wcddinge ; and the gate was shctt vppe.
11 Afterwardes cam also the other
virgins, sayinge. Master, master, open
to vs.

1

But he answered and sayde, Vcrely

I sayc vnto you, Y knowc you not.

13 Lokc that ye watdic therefore, for
ye knowc nether the dayc nor yet the
lioure, when the sonne of man shall
come.

14 Lykwyfic as a ccrtcync man redy to
take his ionioy to a stnuinge countro,
called hys Hcrvauntcs to hym, and dc-
lyvcrcd to tlunn hys gooddc's ;

15 And vnto won he gave v. talentcs,

134

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

;

;

;

sumum twa, sumum an, seghwylcum be
liys agenum msegene ; and ferde sona.

16 Da ferde se de da fif pund under-
feng, .... and gestrynde odere
17 And ealswa se de da twa underfeng,

fife.

gestrynde odre twa.

18 Witodlice se de dset an underfeng,
ferde, and bedealf hyt on eorjjan, and
behydde hys hlafordes feoh.

19 Witodlice sefter miclum fyrste, com
hlaford, and dyhte liym

d»ra ]?eowa
gerad.

20 Da com se de da fif pund under-
feng, and brohte odre fife, and cwse}),
Hlaford, fif pund dii sealdest me, nu !
ic gestrynde odre fife.

21 Da cwaej) hys hlaford to hym, Beo
blij^e, du goda Jjcow and getrywa ; for-
dam de du wsere getrywe ofer lytic j^ing,
ic gesette de ofer mycle ; ga into dines
hlafordes blisse.

22 Da com se de da twa pund under-
feng, and cwse)?, Hlaford, twa piind du
me sealdest ; nu !
ic hsebbe gestryned
odre twa.

23 Da cwse}) hys hlaford to hym, Ge-
dii goda jjeowa and getrywa

blissa,
fordam de du wsere getrywe ofer feawa,
ofer fela ic de gesette ; ga on dines
hlafordes gefean.

24 Da com se de daet an pund under-
feng, and cwse]), Hlaford, ic wat daet du
eart heard man ;
dii ripst d?er du ne
seowe, and gaderast daer du ne spreng-
dest

25 And ic ferde of-drsed, and behydde
din piind on eor|)an ', her du hs&ht d^et
din ys.

26 Da andswarode h3^s hlaford him,
and cwjBJ), Du yfela jjeow and slawa, dii
wistest dfet ic rype deer ic ne sawe, and
ic gaderige doer ic ne stredde

27 Hyt gebyrede daet du befsestest
min feoh myneterum, and ic name donne
ic come daet min ys mid dam gafole.

28 A'nyma)> daet pund set hym, and

1

;

;

XXV. 16-28.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

135

forsothe to an other two, but to an other
oon, to eehe after his owne vertu ; and
wente forth anoon.

16 Forsothe and he that hadde take
fyue talentis, wente forth, and wrou3te
in hem, and wan other fyue.

17 Also and he that hadde taken two,

wan other two.

18 Sothely he that hadde taken oon,
goynge forth, dalf in to the erthe, and
hidde the mone of his lord.

19 Bot after muche tyme, the lord of
tho seruauntis came, and puttide resoun
with hem.

20 And he that hadde taken fyue
talentis, cummynge to,
other
fyue, seyinge, Lord, thou bitokist me
fyue talentis,""" loo 1 I haue geten ouer
other fyue.

offride

2

His lord seith to hym, Wei be thou,
good serUaunt and feithful;^ for vpon
fewe thingis thou hast ben trewe, I shal
ordeyne thee vpon many thingis ; entre
thou in to the ioye of tin lord.

22 Forsothe and he that hadde taken
two talentis, came to, and seith. Lord,
thou bitokist to me two talentis ; loo !
I haue geten ouer other two.

23 His lord seith to him, Wei be thou,
for vpon
good scruaunt and trewe ;
fewe thingis thou hast ben trewe, I shal
ordeyne thee vpon many thingis ; entre
thou in to the ioye of thi lord.

24 Forsothe and he that hadde taken
00 talent, cummynge to, seith. Lord, I
wote that thou art an hard man ; thou
repist wher thou hast nat sewen, and
thou gederist to gidre wher thou hast
nat spreedde abrood ;

25 And I drcdynge wente, and hidde
thi talent in the erthe ; loo ! thou hast
that that is thin.

26 Sothely his lord answerynge, seide
to hym, Yuel seruaunt and slowe, wistist
thou that I repe wher I scwe nat, and
gederc to gidre wher I spradde nat
abrood ?

27 Therforc it bihouyde thee to scnde^
my monee to chaungers, that and I
cummynge shulde haue resceyued for-
sothe that that is myn with vsuris.

28 And so take 5e awey fro hym the

to another ij, and to another one, to
every man after his abilite ; and streyght
waye departed.

16 Then he that hadde receaved the
fyve talentes, went, and bestowed them,
and wane other fyve,

17 Lykwyse he that receaved ij, gayned

other ij.

18 But he that receaved one, went, and
digged a pitt in the erth, and hyd his
masters money.

19 After a longe season, the lorde of
those servauntes cam, and reckened with
them.

20 Then cam he that had receaved fyve
talentes, and brought other fyve, sayinge,
Master, thou deliveredes vnto me fyve
talentes, lo ! I have gayned with them
fyve moo.

21 His master salde vnto him, Well,
good servaunt and faythful ; thou hast
bene faythfull in lytell, I wyll make tho
ruler over moche ; entre in into thy
masters ioye.

22 Also he that receaved ij talentes,
cam, and sayde. Master, thou delyver-
edes vnto me ij talentes ;
I have
wone ij other with them.

lo !

23 His master saide vnto hym, Well,
good servaunt and faythfull ; thou hast
bene faythfull in litell, I woll make the
ruler over moche ; go in into thy mas-
ters ioye.

24 He which had receaved the one
talent, cam also, and said. Master, I
considered that thou wast an harde
man ; which repest where thou sowedst
not, and gadderest where thou strawedst
not

25 And was affrayde and went, and
lo ! thou

hyd thy talent in the erth ;
hast thyn awne.

26 His master answered, and sayde
vnto hym, Evyll sei-vaunt and slcwth-
full, thou knewest that I repe whore I
sowed nott, and gaddre where I strawed
nott

27 Thou oughtcst there fore to havo
had my money to the chaungers, and
then at my commynge shulde I have
receaved my money with vauntage.

28 Take therefore the talent from hym,

130

GOTUIC,36o.

1

;

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

8)'lla|> dam dc mc da tyn jmnd brohtc.

29 Witodlicc fflcon da?ra dc ha^f|» man
nafjt,
t hym

8yl|>, and he hn *"
dat liyni |)inc|>
l»y[' R'tbrodcn.

*

'

'

30 And \vuqia|i done
on da uttnm |'y8lru ;
to|)a gristbitung/

<;

ill |M.>wan
NSup, and

;

3

Witodlice donne manncs sunu cym\t
on hys ma?gen-|>r)-mme, and calle cn^Maa
mid him, donne sit he ofer hys niaj^'cn-
I'ryninics sell
32 And callc |ieo<la he<*\> U»f6ran h>in
K(';,aidcrode, and he afiyndraj)
hi him
Intwynan, swa swa sc hjTde a«yndra|>
da sccj) frani tyccenuni ;
S3 And he gcset da seep on h^-s
swidnm hcalfe, and da tycccnu on hys
wynstrau hcalfe.

34'

•

Chi'
fii-dcr, and onf.
gearwod ys of mid.!

,

><lo mines
.... t cow ge-
dcs fr}-mj>c.

;

35 Mc hingrode, and ge mc scaldon
etan ; mc jjjTBte, and gc mc scaldon
drincan ; ic waes cuma, and ge me in-
ladcidon
36 Ic wws iiacod, and gc mc scryddon ;
ic \vn?8 untnim, and gc eothm to mc
ic wa?8 on cweartcrne, and go comon
to me.
37 Donne and.swaria|» da riht-wi.«w»n,
vc

and
wc «I'
}»)T8tondne, and we dc drinc jkaKKm i

^ligendnc, and \vi

I)rihton. h^v

....i,

j

'

.

TTu

'.^we we diet dii cuma
ladodon; odde nacodnc,

'

'

'

•

and we de scryddon t

39 [*0d<1c hwaonne gcsawon wc de
untrumne,] odde on cwearterne, and we
comon to dc I
40 Donne and8wara|> sc cyning h}-m
and cwy|) to h»
*|> Jo cow soc'tro
hwa huigo 8wa ^.
, jlnum of dysnm
minum lasstum gtbrtklrum, swa lan"c
gc hyt dydon mo.

^

41 Donne 8«»g|> he dam, dc l)co|> on
h)'8 wynHtran hcalfe, Oewltaj), ai%-jT^'(<io,
fram mc, on djct ecc ffr, de ys dooflc

^

'

•

^

,

'

*3S Wl.anuli '
pila|H)(lf»luin ,

wiisi«l(><]uin ?

.!<> Wlmijuh |-aii |'uk

v, wl.iiin s i.;,.iiia.

ai|>|>nu in karkarai, v;ili

ii

l.l\(.ilum tiu

40 Yuli aiidlmfv.iM.U >.i |.iu«]ans

«ji|'i|)

<hi

iiii, Amrn (|i'a
ninanuiia

t4iwijlcMlu|>
bro|»re ineiiittizo, mis tawiilc<lu|>.

|>ir.e

i/wi8, yah jaiui
ininiii»tune

4 I pnmilwjijiif, ynh jniiin, nf lileidumcin
forai. (Javriril^ fairra inia, yu8 fni(|i|>n!mji8,
in Urn |»aU aiwcino, \mUi luanwido un-

XXV. 29-41.] WYCLIFFE, 1380.

TYNDALE, 1526.

137

;

;

talent, and 5eue 3e it to hym that hath
ten talentis.

29 For to euery man hauynge it shal
be 50uen, and he shal haue plente ; and
to h^Tn that hath nat, and that that he
semeth to haue, shal be taken fro hym.

30 And caste ^ee out the vnprofitable
seruaunt, and send 5ee hym in to vtter-
more derknessis ; there shal be weep-
ynge, and betyng to gidre of teeth.

31 Forsothe whanne mannes sone shal
cume in his mageste, and alle his angelis
with hym, thanne he shal sitte on the
sege of his magestee ;

32 And alle folkis shulen be gederid
before hym, and he schal departe hem
atwynne, as a sheperde departith scheep
fro kidis ;
33 And sothli he schal seette the
scheep on his ri3thalf, the kidis forsothe
on the lefthalf

34 Thanne the kyng schal seie to hem,
that shulen be on his ri5thalf. Come 5ee,
the blessid of my fadir, welde 5ee^ the
kyngdam maad redy to 50U fro the
hygynnjnge^ of the world.

35 Forsothe I was hungry, and ^e
5auen to me for to etc ; I thristide, and
5ee 3euen to me for to drynke ; I was
herberlesse, and 566 gederiden''' me;

36 Nakid, and 3ee heliden me ; seik,
and 3ee visitiden me ; I was in prisoun,
and 36 camen to me.

and geve hit vnto him which hath x
talentes.

29 For vnto every man that hath shal-
be geven, and he shall have abound-
ance ; and from hym that hath not,
shalbe taken awaye, even that he hath.

30 And cast that vnprophetable ser-
vaunt into vtter dercknes; there salbe
wepynge, and gnasshinge of theth.

31 When the sonne of man shall come
in hys maieste, and all hys holy an-
gelles with him, then shall he sytt
vppon the seate of his maieste ;

32 And before hym shalbe gaddred all
nacions, and he shall sever them won
from another, as a shepherde putteth
asunder the shepe from the gootes ;

33 And he shall sett the shepe on his
right honde, and the gotes on his lyfte
honde.

34 Then shall the kynge saye to them
on his right honde. Come ye, blessed
chyldren of my father, inheret ye the
kyngdome prepared for you from the
beginninge of the worlde.

35 For I was anhongred, and ye gave
me meate ; I thursted, and ye gave me
drinke ; I was herbroulesse, and ye
lodged me

36 I was naked, and ye clothed me
I was sicke, and ye visited me ; I was
in preson, and ye cam vnto me.

37 Thanne iust men shulen answere to
hym, seyinge, Lord, whenne sy3en we
thee hungry, and we fedd thee ; thristy,
and we 5cucn to thee drynke ?

38 Whenne forsothe

seien we thee
herberlesse, and we gcdriden thee ; or
nakid, and we heliden thee 1

39 Or whenne seien we thee seek, or

in prisoun, and we camen to thee ]

37 Tlien shall the iuste answere hym,
sayinge, Master, when sawe we the
anhongred, an feed the ; or a thurst,
and gave the drynke *?

38 When sawe we the herbroulesse,
and lodged the ; or naked, and clothed
the 1

39 Or when sawe wc the sicke, or in

preson, and cam vnto the ?

40 And he answcryngc shal seie to
hem, Treuly I seie to 30U, us long us
jee diden to oon of these my Icstc bre-
thren, 3ee diden to me.

41 Tliunne the kyng shal seie and to
hem, that shulen be on his left half,
Depart fro me, 300 cursid, in to cuer-

40 And the kynge shall answere and
saye vnto them, Vercly I saye vnto you,
in as mochc as ye have done it vnto
won of the h'ost of these my l)rcthrcn,
ye have done it to me.

41 Then shall the kynge saye vnto
thein, that shalbe on the lyfl'te hande,
Departe from me, ye coursed, into ever-

;

l.?8

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

hu]])in yah aggilum "is.

and hys englum gegearwod.

afj)aursi])S

42 Uiitc gredags was, yan-ni gebu]>
was, yan-ni

mis inatyan ;
dragkidcduj) mik ;
43 Casts, yan-ni gala|)odedu|> mik
naqa]>s, yan-ni wasideduj^ mik ;
sinks,
yah in karkarai, yan-ni gaweisodedu]?
mcina.

44 pannh andhafyand yali |jai, qij^and-
ans, Frauya, whan })uk sewhum grcd-
agana, ai|)j?au af})aursidana, aij)|)au gast,
aij)|^au naqadana, ai|>|)au siukana, aij)|:»au
in karkarai, yan-ni andbahtidedeima j^usl
45 panuh andhafyijj I'm, qi|>ands. Amen
tawidedu}>
qifja
ainamma }>ize leitilane, mis ni tawided-

izwis, yah

{janei

ni

...

^l'-

46 Yah galei|)and ]?ai in balwem aiw-
libain

garaihtans

in

]?ai

einon ;
aiweinon.

'i\>

Chap. XXVI. ^-

bij^e
ustauh lesus alia jjo waurda, qaj) sipon-
yam seinaim,

i Yah war|>,

2 Wituj), |)atei afar twans dagans paska
wair|)i)?, yas-sa sunus mans atgibada, du
ushraniyan.

3 panuh

.

42 Witodlice me hingrede, and ge ne
sealdon me etan ; me |>yrste, and ge me
drincan ne sealdon ;
43 Ic wses cuma, and ge me in ne
ic wses nacod, and ge ne
geladodon ;
scryddon me ; ic wses untrum, and on
cwearterne, and ge ne comon set me.
44 Donne andswarigeajj hym da, and
cwedaf), Dryhten, hwsenne gesawe we
de hingrigendne, odde j^yrstendne, odde
cuman, odde untrnmne, odde on cweart-
erne, and we ne jjenedon de ?

45 Donne andswaraj) se cyning heom,
and cwy]), So]? ic eow secge, swa lange
swa ge ne dydon anum of dysum Isest-
um, ne dyde ge hyt me.
46 And donne faraj? hig on ece susle j
and da rihtwisan on dset ece lif.

Chap. XXVI.

i Witodlice, da se
Hselend hsefde
ealle das sprseca ge-
endod, da cwsej) he to hys leorning-
cnihtum,^

2 Wite ge, dset sefter twam dagum
eastro, and mannes beam by]?

beoj)
geseald, dset he si on rode ahangen.
3 Da wseron gesamnode da ealdras
dsera sacerda and hlafordas dses folces
to dsera sacerda caldres botle, de wses
genemned Caiphas,

4 And hig hsefdon mycel gemot, dset
hig woldon done Hselend mid facnc
besyrwan, and ofslean ;

5 Hig cwaedon witodlice sume, Dset hyt
ne mihtc beon on dam frcols-da?ge, de-la?3
to mycel styrung wurde on dam folce.

6 Da se Haelcnd wres on Bethania, on

Symones huse daes hreoflan,

7 Da genealaehte him to sum ^vif, see
hsefde box mid deorwyr]?re sealfe, and
figeat uppan hys heafod dser he sset.

8 Da gesawon hys leorning-cnihtas dset
and wurdon gebolgene, and cwaedon, To
hwan ys dis forspilled 1

9 Dis mihte bcon geseald to myclum

wur})e, and ])earfum gedseled.

XXV.42.-XXVL9.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

139

;

;

lastynge fijr, the whiche is maad recly
to the deuyl and his angelis.

42 Sothely I hungeryde, and ^e ^auen
nat to me for to ete ; I thristide, and
5ee ^auen nat to me for to drynke ;

43 I was herberlesse, and ^ee gedriden
nat me ; nakid, and 5ee coueredcn nat
me ;
prisoun, and 5ee
visitiden nat me.

seik, and in

44 Thanne and thei shulen answere to
hym, seyinge, Lord, whanne seien we
thee hungrynge, or thristynge, or her-
berlesse, or nakid, or seik, or in prisoun,
and we seruyden nat to thee 1

45 Thanne he shal answere to hem,
seiynge, Treuly I seie to 50U, hou longe
5ee diden nat to oon of these leste,
nethere ^ee diden to me.

46 And these shulen go in to euer-
forsothe the iust

lastynge tourment ;
men in to euere lastinge lyf.

Chap. XXVI.

is don,
whenne Jhesus hadde eendid alle these
wordis, he seide to his disciplis,

i And it

lastinge fire, whicli is prepared for the
devyll and hys angels.

42 For I was an hungred, and ye gave
me no meate ; I thursted, and ye gave
me no drynke

43 I was herbroulesse, and ye lodged
me nott ; I was naked, and ye clothed
me nott ; I was sycke, and in preson,
and ye visited me not.

44 Then shall they also answere hym,
Master, when sawe we the
sayinge.
anhungred, or a thurst, or herbroulesse,
or naked, or sicke, or in preson, and
have not ministred vnto the 1

45 Then shall he answere them, and
saye, Verily I saye vnto you, in as moche
as ye dyd it nott to won off the leest of
these, ye dyd it nott to me.

46 And these shall go into everlastinge
lyfo

rightous

and the

into

payne ;
eternall.

Chap. XXVI.

when Jesus had fynisshed all
sayinges, he sayd vnto his disciples,

i And hit folowed,
these

2 Wite 5ee, for after two dayes pask
shal be maad, and mannes sone shal be
bitaken, that he be crucified.

3 Thanne the princis of prestis and
eldre men of the peple ben gedrid in to
the halle of the prince of prestis, that
was said Caiphas,

4 And maden a counseile, that thei
shulden holde Jhesu with gile, and
slea;

5 Sothly thei seiden, Nat in the feste
day, lest per auenture noys were maad
in the peple.

6 Forsothe whenne Jhesus was in Bct-

anye, in the house of Symount leprous,
7 A womman hauynge a boxe of ala-
bastre of preciouse oyncment, came ni3
to hym, and shedde out on the heued of
hym rcstinge.

8 Sothely disciplis seeynge haddcn

dedeyn, seyinge, Wherto this losse 1

9 Forsothe it mi^te be solde for mychc,

and be 5ouen to pore men.

2 Ye knowe, that after .ij. dayes shal-
be ester, and the sonne of man shalbe
delyvered, for to be crucified.

3 Then assembled togedder the cliefe
prestes and scrybes and seniours of the
people in to the palice off the liye
preste, which was called Cayphas,

4 And heelde a counsell, howe they
mygt take Jesus by suttelte, and kyll
him

5 Butt they sayd, Not on the holy
daye, lest eny trouble aryse amonge the
people.

6 When Jesus was in Bethany, in the

housse of Symon the lypper,

7 There cam vnto him a woman which
had an alublaster boxe of precious oynt-
ment, and powred it on his heed as he
sate att the bourdc.

8 When his disciples sawe that the}' had
indignacion, sayinge, What nedcd this
wast 1

9 This oyntment myght have bene well

solde, and yeven to the povre.

}0

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

2
7
1

1 o f>n BO ITirlcncl hyt wigt**, da cwa-|>
he to hcom, Hwi Hj-nt rc graroe clysiim
wife ? witodlicc god wcorc hco wurlitc
on me.

1

S}Tnlc ge habba|) )>car£an mid cow,

ac gc nabbaj) inc symlc.

1

Ileo dydc das Boalfc on mmno
lichaman, dajt ic wacre gesmyretl to
bebyr^nne.

13 86}) ic sccgc cow, swa hwicr swa
dys gotlspcl byj) gclHxlod on eallura
nii(l<lan-eardc, byj^ gesacd on hyrc gc-
mynd, da't boo dis dydc.

14 Da fcrde nn of dam twrlfum, do
wrcs goncmncil Iiid.iB so widcrsaai, to
d.^Di-a wircrda eaUlrum,

15 And cwa^|) to boom, Hwa^t wyWc go
iiic syllan, and ic liync btl.Twe cowl
Da btlic'ton big bym j'ritig 6< ylllngA.

16 And .syddan ho
dffit be bjiic wuldc b<-

'

^'cc,

1

Da on dam fonnan gcarcung-<lirge
pcncaladiton da Icomini: cnibtas to dam
Ha'lcnde, and dus cwaMlon. H\va»r wy\i
dii da^t we gegearwion do dine jicnunga,
to ea8tron ?

18 Da cwR*|> BO Ilaclend, Faraj> on daa
ccastre to sunuim men, and Rerijoa|>
bim, 8c lareow 8eg|», Min tima yn ge-
l»en(b* ; djrt ic mid de w^Toe nrne castro
mid mininn bx>rning-rnililuin.

19 And da leoming-rnibtas dydon swa
e lla'Irnd beom bebcad ; and big gc-
gearwodun bim eA>ter-)>enungc.

hys twelf 1

ao On dam icfcnc, sa^t sc Hwlen<i mid
cnihtnm irt geroonle.
... .tton be cwicji to bim,
Wit^xlb'ce ic secge eow, djet an cower
l>cla'\v|i mc.

21 And li..

2 3 Dii wunlon big swidc gc-nnr6tso«1c
and onpan anra gebw7lc cwedan, Dribtcn,
cwyst du com ic b}-t 1

2^ And be andHwanxle and diis cwjr|»,
Sc do l)e<lyp|» on distv mi«l mc liys
band, sc mc beljpw|>.

24 Wito«lb*ce manncs sumi f.Tr|'. swa
bit jiwriten ys be liim ; w.i dam mm,
|»urh done dc by)) mannes sunn

l>c-

6
8
1

;

9
8
7

XXVI. IO-24.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

141

10 Sothely Jhesus wytinge, seith to
hem, What be 5e heuy^ to this wom-
manl sothely a good work she hath
wrou5t in me.

1

For whi 5ee shulen euermore haue
pore men with 50U, but 3ee shulen nat
algatis haue me.

12 Forsothe this womman sendenge
this oynement in to my body, made for
to birye me.

13 Treuly I seie to 50U, wher euer this
gospel shal be prechid in al the world,
it shal be seide and that this womman
dide, in to mynde of hym.

10 When Jesus vnderstod that, he
sayde vnto them. Why trouble ye the
woman ? she hath wroght a good worke
apon me.

11 For ye shall have povre folke
alwayes with you, butt me shall ye not
have all wayes.

12 And in that she casted this oynt-
ment on my body, she dyd hit to bury
me with all.

this

gospell

13 Verely I saye vnto you, where-
preached
soever
throughoute all the worlde, there shall
also thys thatt she hath done be tolde,
for a memoriall of her.

shalbe

14 Thanne oon of the twelue, that was
seide Judas Scarioth, wente forth to the
princis of prestis,

15 And seith to hem, "What wolen 5ee
5eue to me, and I shal bitake hym to
^ou? And thei ordeyneden to hym
thritti platis of seluer.

1

And fro that tyme he sou3te coue-

14 Then won of the twelve, called
Judas Iscarioth, went vnto the chefe
prestes,

15 And sayd, Whatt wyll ye geve me,
and I Avyll delyver hym vnto you 1 And
they apoynted vnto hym thirty peces of
sylver.

16 And from that tyme he sought

nablete, for to bitake hym.

oportunite, to betraye hym.

17 Forsothe in the first day of the fest
of pask disciplis camen to Jhesu, sey-
inge, Wher wolt thou we make redy to
thee, for to ete paske ?

1

The fyrst daye of vnlevended breed
the disciples cam to Jesus^ sayinge vnto
hym. Where wylt thou that we prepare
for the, to eate the ester lambe ?

1

And Jhesus seith, Go ^ee in to the
citee to sum man, and seie to hym. The
maister seith, My tyme is ni^ ; at thee
I make paske with my disciplis.

19 And the disciplis diden, as Jhesus
comaundide to hem ; and thei maden
redy pask.

20 Forsothe euenyng maad, he sat at

the mete with his twelue disciplis.

21 And he seide to hem etyngc, Treuly
I seie to 30U, for oon of 30U is to be-
traye me.

22 And thei ful sory bygunnyn cclie

to seie, Lord, wher I am ?

23 And he answerynge seith, He that
witli me in f)uttith the bond in the
plater, this shal bitraye me.

24 Forsothe manncs sone goth, as it is
writen of hym ; but woo to that man,
bi whom muunys sonc shal be bitrayed

1

And he said. Go into the cite vnto
souche a man, and saye to hym. The
master sayeth. My tyme ys almoste come
I wyll kei)e myne ester att thy housse
with my disciples.

1

And the disciples dyd, as Jesus had
apoynted them j and made redy the
ester lambe.

20 When the even was come, he sate

doune with the xij.

21 And as they dyd eate, he sayde,
Verely I saie vnto you, that won of you
shall bctraye me.

22 And they were exccdinge sorofiiU
and began every man to saye vnto hym,
Ys hit I, master 1

23 He answercde and sayde, lie that
dopcth Ijis honde with me in the disshc,
shall bctraye me.

24 The Sonne of man goeth, as yt is
wryttcn of hym ;
])utt wo be to that
man, ])y whom the sonnc of man shalbe

142

GOTHIC, 360.

;

ANGLO SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

l8pwe<l ; liotorc wwrc dam men, tti t he
na*frc noprc acenned.

25 l)d cwn?[» Imlas Ac liync Warwde,
Cwyst (lu, Inroow, liwa-ilcr ic Iiyt si ? !)a
cwa>}> se Ha>leD(l, l)u Inl saetlcht,

26 \Vit<KlHcc i\a lii^ a'tf»n, nc IIa'len<l
nam lilaf, and huie j;«l»Ii t84xU\ and
br«c, and sealde hys leoniinj^-cnihtum,
and cwfej), Onf6|), and cta)> ; ttis ys min
Hchama.

27 And he penam done calic. jiancicnde,
and Roalde hym, dus cwedcnde, Drinca)>
Ciillc of ilysum

28 Dis 18 witodlice mines Modes calic
iiiwre IT, da*t l»y|» for manegiim ilgotcn,
on synna for^yfennoiwe.

29 Witodlice ic secjje cow, dn^t ic ne
drince lieononfor|>, of dysuni eorjiHojin
wine, a'r dam da?f^e do ic drince da*t
niwe mid cow, on mines f:edcr rice.

sovy ' -
cnne, n

'

^

,

,

31 Da Bapde 8C Hirlend heom, ICallo
gc wurda[> ge-untreow8o<!c on me, on
dyaso nihte ; hji ys awritrn, purh da>a
h}Tde8 siege, l)y|» soo lieord totlncfeil.

32 Wito<llice R*fter dam de ic of deaJHS

arise, ic cume to cow on Gal ilea.

33 })a andswynle IVtni« lum, and dus
• owsiuii

cwa'}», Drah dc In^ ealle l
on dc. ic nii'fre ne ge-unt

*

•

34 Da cwfe)» se Ilivlend, S<»[» jc Roogc
dc cocc

dr. da't on d}*88ere nihte >
cnlwe. |»riwa dii widsoBCSt

*

35 Dii Ra>dc IVtruR him. \N

deah dc ic .scyle swcltan mid ... .
widaace ic din.
ealle da iHlre Ico'

O^^lico dam cwaulon

•uht4u«.

..c

'

1

36 Dii com se
mitl him on
done tiin, de is ;.
d (Jethsmmni.
Ami aa'de h}Ti leoniing-cnilitum, Sitta|»
her, od da't ic gii hidcr-get»nd, an«l mc
gehidde.
37 And he genam Petnmi, and Zol>e-
don« twegcn Runa, and ongan unroUian
and l)eon unrot.

38 Da sirdc sc Ilwlend heom, I'nrot
gebida|t her, and

yt min sawl od dea|» ;
wnciaji mid me.

;

1

XXVL 25-38.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
it were good to hym, 51 f that man
hadde nat ben boren.

25 Forsothe Judas that bitrayed hym,
answeride, seyinge, Maister, wher I am 1
He seith to hym, Thou hast seid.

26 Forsothe hem soupynge, Jhesus
toke breed, and blisside, and bracke,
and 5aue to his disciplis, and seith, Take
3ee, and ete ; this is my body.

27 And he takynge the cuppe, dede
thankyngis, and 5aue to hem, seyinge,
Drinke 566 alle herof

28 This is my blood of the newe testa-
ment, the whiche shal be shed out for
many, in to remissioun of synnys.

29 Forsothe I seie to 50U, I shal nat
drinke fro this tyme, of this fruyt of the
vyne, til in to that day whenne I slial
drinke it newe with 30U, in the kyng-
dam of my fadir.

30 And an ympne^ seid, thei wenten

out in to the mount of Olyuete.

31 Thanne Jhesus seith to hem, Alle
5e shulen suffre selaundre in me, in this
ni3t ; for it is wrytyn, I shal smyte the
sheperde, and the sheep of the floe
shulen be seatered.

32 Forsothe after that I shal ryse
a3ein, I shal go bifore 50U in to Galilee.
33 >Sothely Petre answeryuge, seith to
him, And ^if alle shulen be sclaundrid
in thee, I shal neuere be sclaundrid.

34 Jhesus seith to hym, Trewly I seie
to thee, for in this ni3t bifore the cok
crowe, thries thou shah denye me.

35 Petre seith to hym, And 3 if it shal
behoue me to dye with thee, I shal
nat denye thee. Also and alle disciplis
seiden.

^6 Thanne Jhesus came with hem in
to a toun, that is seid Gcsscmanye. And
lie scide to liis disciplis, Sittc 300 hccr,
the while I shal go tliidir, and preie.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

143

betrayed ;
man, yff he had never bene borne.

it had bene good for that

25 Then Judas which betrayed him,
answerede, and sayde, Ys yt I, master ?
He sayde vnto hym. Thou haste saide.

26 As they ate, Jesus toke breed, and
gave thankes, brake it, and gave it to
his disciples, and sayde, Take, eate
thys ys my body.

27 And toke the cuppe, and gave
thankes, and gave it them, sayinge,
Drinke of it every won ;

28 This ys my bloudde of the newe
testament, which shalbe shedde for many,
for the foryevenes of synnes.

29 I saye vnto you, I wyll not drynke
hence foorth, of this frute of the vyne
that daye when I shall
tree, vntyll
drynke it newe with you, in my faders
kyngdom.

30 And when they had sayd grace,

they went out into mounte Olyvete.

3

Then sayd Jesus vnto them, All ye
shall fall this nyght, because of me ; for
yt ys wrytten, I wyll smyte the shep-
lierde, and the shepe of the flocke shalbe
scattered abroode.
32 But after I am rysen ageyne, I wyll
goo before you into Galile.

33 Peter answered, and sayde vnto
him, Though all men shulde be hurte
by the, yett wyll not I be hurte.

34 Jesus sayde vnto hym, Verely I
saye vnto the, that thys same night
before the cocke crowe, thou shalt denye
me thryse.

35 Peter sayde vnto hym, Yff I shulde
dye with the, yet wyll I not denye
Lyke wyse also sayde all the dis-
the.

ciples.

36 Then went Jesus with them in to a
place, which ys called Gcthsemane. And
sayde vnto hys disciples, Sitt yc here,
whyll I go, and prayc yonder.

37 And Pqtre taken to, and two sonys
of Zcbedec, he began for to be dis-
tourblid^ and sory in hcrtc.

38 Thanne lie seith to hem, My soulc
18 sorowful til to the dcth ; susteync
jce^ here, uud wake 3ee with me.

37 And he toke with hym Pctor, and
the two sonncfl of Zc-bedc, and begun to
wcxe sorofull and to be in an agony.
38 Then sayd Jesus vnto them, My
Boulo iH hevy even vnto the deeth ; tary
ye hen;, and watche with me.

I

n

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON. 995.

[St. Matt.

39 And (la he wtcB hi -hwon <1anon
iT^mn, he afeoll on h^-s aiisync, and hyne
j^'ebanl, and dua cwo*}*. Fabler nnn, ^rst
hyt boon mn»go, gewite dcs calic fnim
me ; deali |j wax! ere na swa swa ic wylle,
ac 8Wa Kwa (lu wylt.

40 And he com to hys leoming-cniht-
um, and he gemette hig 8la'|>cnde.
And he sacde Petre, Swa, ne niihtc go
nil wncian ane tld mid mc?

41 Waciaj), and gcljiddaj) cow, diet ge
in ne gan on costnuni^c ; witodlice so
giifit is hraxl, and dat fla'sc ys untrum.

42 Eft cdre aide he fcrde, and hyne
gebaed, and cwa;|>, Min fanler, pyi dca
ailic ne m»ge gewitan, buton ic hyne
drince, gewurdc din willa.
43 And he com eft, and gcmcttc hig
aojilice heora eagan wscron

<lo ;

44 And he forlet hig efl, and fcrtlc,
and hyne gebn?d |»nddan side, cwcdendo
dai y)ce gebcd.
45 Da com he to hj-a Icoming-cnihtum,
and sirdc hcom, Slnpaji callunga, and
re8ta|i cow ; nii ! gcnealfro^ sco tiM. and
mannes sunu by|> geseald on synfulra
hand ;

46 .Vrifia}', uton faran ; ml ! gcncala'c|>,

sc do mc bcla'w|>.
47 Da he dila

|)ing apnrc, (hi com
Tmla8, an of dam twrlfum, and niiccl
fulc mid hym, mid swturtlum antl sald-
um, aacndc fram dn^ra aaccrvia caldnim,
and da'8 folccs caldnim.

48 Sc dc hyne bclwwdc. acaldc hcom
ticn, and cwn>|», Swa hwaiic awa ic
c^-asc, 8C hyt is ; nima|> hyne.

49 And he gcncala-litc hraMJlirc to dam
Hahndc. and cwn»|», Hal boo du, larcow;
and he cystc h}*ne,

r,o l)a'cwa>|> ae T^ '

'

'

'

>. ICala

frcontl, to hwam !>•
i^'cnra-
Isrhton hig, and done HaMcnd gcnamon.

r^i Witudlicc! an da^ra dc mid dam
Ha'lcndc wira, abranl h)-a awconl ; and
fUloh of anca d»ra aaccnla caldrca |>cow-
an care.

.«;2

!).i cw«»|i ac Ha'lcnd to hym, Do
wntmllicc

dill 8\vconl on hys acv)>e ;

;

XXVI. 39-52.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

145

39 And he gou forth a litil, felle doun
in to his face, preyinge, and seyinge,
My fadir, ^if it is possible, passe this
cuppe fro me ; netheles nat as I wole,
but as thou wolt.

40 And he came to his disciplis, and
foonde hem slepynge. And he seith to
Petre, So, wher 5ee mi5te nat oon hour
wake with me 1

41 Wake 3ee, and preie, that 5ee en-
tren nat in to temptacioun ; forsothe
the spirit is redy, bote the flesh seik.'''

42 Eft the secounde tyme he wente,
and preide, seyinge, My fadir, ^if this
cuppe may nat passe, no bote I drynke
it, thi wille be don.
43 And eftsone he came, and foonde
hem slepynge ; forsothe her e^en wercn
greued.
44 And hem left, he wente eftsone,
and preide the thridde tyme, the same
word seyinge.

45 Tlianne he came to his disciplis,
and seith to hem, Slepe 5ee nowe, and
the hour hath nei5ed,
reste 50 ;
and mannes sone shal be taken in to
the hondis of sjTiners ;

loo !

loo ! he tliat

46 Ilyse 5ee, go wee ;
shal take me, shal nei3e.
47 And 3it hym spekyngc, loo ! Judas,
oon of the twclue, and with hym came
a grete cumpanye, with swerdis and
battis, sent of the princes of prestis,
and of cldre men of the peple.

48 Forsothe he that bitraiedc hym, ^aue
to hem a tokne, seiynge. Whom cucr Y
shal kisse, he it is ; holde 300 hym.

49 And anon he cummynge ni3 to
Jhcsu, seide, Hailc, maistrc ; and lie
kissidc hym.

50 And Jliesus scidc to hym, Frend.
whcrto art thou comen 1 Tlianne thci
canien ni3, and castiden hondis in to
Jhcsu, and Iielden hym.

51 And loo ! oon of hem that wercn
with Jhcsu, holdyngc out the bond,
drow3 out his swcrd ; and he, smytyngc
the scruaunt of the prince of prestis,
kitte of liis litil crc.

52 Thannc Jhcsus seith to hym, Turnc
thi swcrd in to his place ; sothely allc

39 And he went a way a lytell aparte,
and fell flatt on hys face, and prayed,
sayinge, O my father, yf it be possyble,
lett this cuppe passe from me ; never-
thelesse nott as I wyll, butt as thou
wylt.
40 And he cam vnto hys disciples, and
founde them a slepe. And sayde to
Peter, What, coulde ye not watche with
me one houre 1

41 Watche, and praye, that ye fall not
into temptacion ; the sjjirite ys will-
ynge, but the flesshe is weeke.

42 He went agayne ons moare, and
pryed, sayinge, O my father, yf this
cuppe can nott passe away from me, but
that I drynke of it, thy will be fulfylled.
43 And he cam, and founde them
for their eyes were

aslepe a gayne ;
bevy.

44 And he leffte them, and went
agayne, and prayed the thrid tyme,
sayinge the same wordes.

45 Then cam he to hys disciples, and
sayd vnto them, Slepe hence forth, and
take youre reest ; take hede I the houre
is at honde, and the sonne of man shal-
be betrayed in to the hondes of synners

46 Ryse, lett vs be goinge j he is at

honde, that shall betraye me.
47 Whyll he yet spake, lo ! Judas, won
of the twelve cam, and with him a
greate multitude, with sweardes and
staves, whycli were sent from the chefe
prestes, and seniours of the people.
48 He that betrayed hym, gave them
a token, sayinge. Whomsoever I kysse,
that same is he ; ley hondes on him.
49 And forth withall he cam to Jesus,
and sayde, Hayll, master ; and kysscd
him.

50 And Jesus sayde vnto him, Frendc,
wherfore arte thou come 1 Then cam
they, and layed hondes on Jesus, and
toko him.

51 And beholdcl won of them which
were with Jchuk, Htretchcd onto his honde,
and drue his swcardc ; and stroke a
scrvaunt of the hye presto, and smote
of his care.

.52 Then sayde Jesus vnto hym, I'nlt
vppe thy swcardc in to his sheathe ; for

14(i

GOTUJC, 300.

ANGLO-SAXON. 995.

[^t. Matt.

'

cnllr f!a rtc swcord nyma|», mid swcordc
hig f<)n»*ur<1a|>.

53 Wciist (1u. daet ic ne myhtc biddan
niinnc fa>der, ^R*t he scndc me nu ma
donne twelf coredu eiifjla ?

f')4 Hu maj^on Ikjoii ^efylletle da hal^^an
pewritu, de be mc awTitcne 8}'nt ? for-
dain (Ills li}*! jjcbyraj) U* \»
55 On da-re tide cwtL'\»

<'nd to
dam folcc, Eallswa to |>eofe ge sjiit
cumene, mid fiweonlum an«l Tiii«l saliluin,
me to inTiianne ; dn*pliwanilire ic
mid cow on dam temple, and laerdc eow,
and ge mc ne namon.

s>;«t

56 Dis eall ys ^'cworden, diet d.Tra
wite;,'ena Iial^mn ^cwritu Bvn ^'cfyllode.
})a flugon eallc da Icorning-cnihtus, and
forlt'ton liyne.
57 And liig genamon done Ilsclend,
and Itrddon
lj}'ne to Caifdian, da?ni
. dicr da IxSccraB, and da
!iodc waeron.

sa(<

eal<i

_

'

'

'

58 rctnifl li}nn fyligde feorrane, od lie
com to dasra aacerda ealdrcs Initle ; and
he in-co<lc, and sat mid dam |x>num,
da-t he pesriwe done cnde.
59 V

icerda ealdras, and
call d;« I
.- .i,i,,ij laL'<e wigji oni,'rn
d«>ne Ha-lend, da»t hig hync to dcajc
sealdon ;

;,. 1...

L

60 An«l hig ne mihton nane findan, da
da niancga mid leaRum onsagum genea-
i)a a't-nehstan comon twegcD
Itrhton.

dft»ra leogera,

61 And cwa'don, Des Bwde, Ic ma»g
towurjmn Qcxlet} tcm)d. and ajflcr |>rym
dai^iini "
62 D.i

; ra Racenia and
ewa»|>, No andwjTdst dii nan |>ing ongcu
da, de dis de onsecgca|> ?

:»n.

'

63 Sc Halend 8uwo<1e.

Da se caldor
divra Rarenla cwn»|», Ic halsiije de j'urh
done 1!'"
t dii gecgc UB,
uu.
trvf dt:

- r '

'

'

'

•'

04 i

,1 \v sccge, n^

1 him to. Hi

dii 8a «i
d}*sum ge geHco|> manncs l>eani sittem
on da flwidnm healfe fto<le«
I'mnmes, and cumcnduc on h.
wulcnum.

?

4

I

XXVI. 53-64.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

147

;

that shulen take swerd, shulen perislie
by swerd.

53 "VVher gessist tliou^ that I may nat
preie my fadir, and he shal 5eue to me
now more than twelue leo-ions of ano^elis 1
54 Hou therfore shulen the scriptm^is
be fulfillid 1 for so it behoueth t© be
don.

55 In that hour Jhesus seide to the
cumpanyes of peple, As to a theef 566
ban gon out, with swerdis and battis,
for to cacche me ; day by day I satte
at 50U, techynge in the temple, and 3ee
helden not me.

56 Forsothe al this thing was don, that
the scripturis of prophetis shulden be
Thanne alle disciplis fledden,
fulfiUid.

li^nn forsaken.
57 And thei holdynge Jhesu, ledden
hym to Caiphas, prince of prestis, wher
scribis and Pharisees, and the eldre men
of the peple hadden cummen to gidre.

58 Forsothe Petre suede hym afer, til
in to the halle of the prince of prestis ;
and he gon ynne with ynne, sate with
Beruauntis, that he shulde se the eend.

59 Forsothe the princis of prestis, and
alle the counseile sou^ten fals witness-
ynge a3einus Jhesu, that thei shulden
take hym to deth ;

60 And thei founden nat, whenne
many fals witnessis hadden cummen to.
Treuly at the laste, two fals witnessis
camen,

61 And seiden, This seide, I may dis-
truye tlie temple of God, and after the
thridde day bilde it a3ein.

62 And the prince of prestis rysynge
ieith to hym, Answerist thou no thing
to tho thingis, the whichc these wit-
nesscn a^cinus thee ]

63 Forsothe Jliesus was stille. And
the prince of prestis seitli to hym, I
Couniour thee by quyckc God, that thou
Beic to vs, 3if tliou be Crist, tlie sonc of
God.

64 Jhesus ficidc to liym, Thou hast
ieid ; ncthcles I seie to 30U, an <jtlier
tymc^ 3cc simlcn sc manncs sonc sitt-
ynge at tlic
ri3tli}ilf of tlic vcrtuc of
God, and cumniyngc
of
hcucne

cl(mdis

in

all they that ley bond on the swearde,
shall perysshe with the swearde.

53 Other thynkest thou, that I can
not praye my father, and he shall geve
me moo then xij. legions of angelles ?

54 Howe then shall the scriptures be

fulfylled ? for so muste it be.

55 The same tyme sayd Jesus to the
multitude. Ye be come out as it were
vnto a thefe, with sweardes and staves,
for to take me ; dayly I sate a monge
you, teachinge in the temple, and ye
toke me not.

56 All this was done, that the scrip-
tures off the prophettes myght be ful-
Then all his disciples forsoke
filled.
him, and fleed.
57 And they toke Jesus, and leed hym
to Cayphas, the hye preeste, where the
scrybes, and the senyours were * assem-
bled.

58 Peter folowed hym a farre of, vnto
the hye prestes place ; and went in,
and sate with the servauntes, to se the
ende.

59 The chefe prestes, and the seniours
and all the counsell sought false witnes
ageinste Jesus, for to put him to deeth

60 And they founde none, in so moche
that when many false witnesses cam,
At the last, cam
yet founde they none.
two false wytnesses,

61 And sayd. This felowe saide, I can
distroye the temple of God, and bylde
the same in iij dayes.

these

62 And the chefe presto arose and
sayde to hym, Answcrest thou nothinge,
bearc witnes
howe is
agcynst the 1

it that

63 Butt Jesus heldc hys peace.

And
the chefe ])reestc answered and said to
liym, I charge the in the name off the
lyvinge God, that thou tell vs, whether
thou be Ciirist, the sonne of (iod.

64 Jesus sayd to hym, Thou liastc
sayd ; nevorthelcssc I sayc vnto you,
here after shall ye sc the sonnc of man
syttinge on the right lioiwle of ])()wer,
the
and
sUyc.

the clowddes

come in

of

L2

;

ANGLO-SAXON, 995-

I^t. Matt.

6r; n.i <1irrft Mcerda ealdor shit hys
ii^'en rcaf, antl cwk|», Din y« hyKnu.r-
sprwc ; to hwi wihii^'c wc spni^o-e itiWo
sage ? nu ! gc gchyrdon of hym gyltlico
gpncce

66 Hwirt ys cow nu pc|»uht ? Hij: and-
wordon callc and cwaedon, He U dca[>ea

scyhlijr.

67 l^a Bpactton \uf^ on h>*8 ansync, and
heoton hync mid hcora fystuni ; sunic
liyno shijron on his ansync mid hyra
bniduni haiuhmi,
68 And cwaMlon, Segc us, Crist, hwat
ys sc <te dc sh'di 1

69 Petnis soj'liec sirt iitc on «1am cafiT-
tune ; da com to hym an |>cowen, and
cwa^|>, And dii wwre mid Clam Galilci-
Bccan lia^lcndc.

70 And he widsoc bofonm ealluni, and
cwa'|>. N.it ic hwa^t dii sc'j^-^t.
71 })a he ut-oo*lc of da^re dnra. da
peseah hync odcr wyln, and sa^h' dam
de dwr wwron, An«l dcs was mid dam
Nazaronis.
72 And 1
hys niin t)inj( nc ciide.
73 \y
da dc
St')|»Hcc dii cart of h}nn ; and din spnrt-
de gcs\viitola|>.

V''umf\T>*
i,and in\

'.'t mid a|>o, dat he

- M ' vdc.

i-.'i......

'"

74 Da wt^oc he and sworedo, da»t h-
ntrfrc done man nc ciide. And hratlhi •
da creow sc coco.

75 *^" pimundo Potnis da»8 Ha'lcndis
wi»r*l, do ho cwa»|>. /V7n1am dc »c ctn-'
And ho
cnlwo. I^riwa dii mo wid'^an'st.
code lit, and wcop bityrlioc.

GOTHIC, 3<io.

14H

65^

|»jinrl)iini woitwo<lc1
HU ! nu ^jahaii.sidiHlu|> |h) wnyuinercin is ;

66 ^Vlm izwis |Mii:kcM|> ?

1^ cIr and-

ImfyaiMlauH <irj)Uii, Skulu aau|>au8 ist.

67 panuli si»iwiin ana amlawloizn is,
yjili kjuii.iuitcilun ina ; 8umai|)-|'au lofam
Hlohun,

68 Qi|»an(lans, ?i-nufotci unsis, Christu,

wluus ist 8rt slalmntls |nik ?

6(> I|> Paitnis iita sat ana rohsnai ; yah
(lu!iti«l«lya iinina aiina |nwi, i|i|mn(k'i, \uh
I'll wast nii}> k'saa |)aninia Cialeilaiau.

7o^i|> is lam^nida fanra |niini allaim,

qi|mn«l8, Ni wait wha c|i|>i8.

71 rs;,'aLri:i»n(lan jmn ina in (lanr.,^^-
Hawli ina an|mra, yali (ja)) du |mim yainar,
Yali 8U was mi}> icsua juunnm Niizoruiau.

72 Yah aflra afaiaik m\\\ aijia swar-

nmls, I'atci ni kann jnina niannan.

73 Afar leitil,

l^an

atira^^^nm.lans

j^ai

Btandandans, qrjnjn Paitrau, JJi 8unyai
yah |>u |M/e is ; yah auk ray.du |>ciua
l»an<lwt'i|» |nik.

74 paniilj «hii;ann afih»myan yah swar-
nn, |>atri ni kaun |>ana niannan.
\a\\
Buns liana hnikiila.

75 Yah ;;anunMhi Paitrus wanidis ics-
uis, qijmniK du sis, patoi fanr hanins
Yuh
hnik, (irim 8in|>nm afaikis niik.
usj^ag'^aiuls ut, gaigrot baitraba.

Chap. XXVI I.

i At manrijin |»an
waur|ninana, nina ncmun alhii ^;ndyans.
• ms manajjoins l>i lisu, v\

\

'

'

ma.

2 \

ana
ina

'

CiiAP. XXVII.

1 WitodHco da hyt
eallo dara
d.i v
morp*n wa'j*.
saorrdn caldnw gem
d.i's f<»loc«
oahlnui oni?cn done liaMcud, da?t hig
hync to

'wd.m.
i bync po)»undrnne,
and soahhm hync dam I'ontiscoan I'ihitc,
dam iloman.

3 Am! 1.., •

i

11,

\ ail

kind-

3 panulj LTUHaiw hands li

h ludaH dc Imio bola'wdo,
wa»«, da onpan he
i.'mod
yands ina,
war|», idrcigonds, gawaudida jmns |»rins ' hrcowsian, and brohtc da |>nttig sryl-

ihi htuu .

|>atri

flat

^

3 O

i

1

;

;

XXVI.65.-XXVII.3.]WYCLIFrE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

149

65 Thanne the prince of prestis kitte'''
Lis clotbis, seyinge, He hath blasfemed ;
what 3it nede han we to witnessis 1 loo !
now 5ee han herd blasfemye ;

65 Then the bye preste rent his clothes,
sayinge, He hath blasphemed ; what nede
we off eny moo witnesses ?
lo ! nowe
have ye herde his blasphemy

66 What semeth to 50U ? And thei
answerynge seiden, He is gilty of deth.

66 What thyncke ye 1 They answered

and sayd, He is worthy to dye.

67 Thanne thei spitten in to his face,
and smyten hym with bufFetis ; forsothe
other 50uen strokis with the pawm of
hondis in to his face,

67 Then spat they in hys face, and bett
him with there fistes ; and other smote
him ^vith the palme of there hondes on
the face,

68 Seyinge, Thou Crist, prophecie to

68 Saynge, Arede to vs, Christ, who

vs, who is he that smote thee "?

ys he that smote the 1

69 Sothely Petre sat with outen in the
porche ; and an bond mayden came ni^
to hym, se^nnge, And thou were with
Jhesu of Galilee.

70 And he denyede before alle men,

sepnge, I woot nat what thou saist.

7

Forsothe hym goynge out the ^ate,
an other bond mayden say hym, and
seith to hem that weren there, And this
was with Jhesu of Nazareth.

72 And eftsone he denyede with an
00th, for he knewe nat the man.

73 And after a litil, thei that stoden
came ni3, and seiden to Petre, Trculy
and thou art of hem ; for whi and thi
Bpechc makith thee opyn.

74 Thanne lie began to warye and
swere, that he knewe nat the man.
And anon the cok crew.

75 And Petre bithou5te on the word
of Jhesu, that he hadde scidc, Bifore
the cok crewe, thries thou shalt denye
me. And he gon out, wepte bittirly.

6g Peter sate with out in the palice

and a damsell cam to hym, saynge,
Thou also waste with Jesus of Galile.

70 He denyed before them all, sayinge,

I woot not what thou sayst.

71 When he was goone out into the
poorche, another wenche sawe hym, and
sayde vnto them that were there, Thys
felowe was also with Jesus of Nazareth.
72 And agayne he denyed with an
oothe, and sayde, I knowe nott the man.
7 3 And after a whyle, cam vnto hym
they that stode bye, and sayde vnto
Peter, Suerly thou arte even won of
them ; for they speache bewreyeth the.

74 Then began he to course and to
sweare, that he knewe not the man.
And immedyatly the cocke krewe.

75 And Peter remembred the wordes
of Jesu, whych he sayde vnto hym,
the cocke crowe, thou shallt
Ik'fore
And went out at the
deny me thryse.
dores, and wepte bitterly.

Chap. XXVII. i Forsothe the morwe
Tnaad, alle the princis of prestis, and
eldrc men of tin; pej)le token couiiscil
ajeins Jbcsu, that tliei sbulden take
hym to deth.

2 And tliei laddon hym l)f>undcn, and
bitokcn hym to Pilut of Pounce, mciie.^

3 Thanne Judas tliat bitraycde hym,
•cynge that he wjus damjmyd, he led l)y
pcnuuncc/ brou3tc a3ein thritti platis of

Chap. XXVII.

i When the morn-
ynge was come, all the chcfe prestos,
and senyours off the jx'ople
lielde a
counnayle agenst Jesu, to i)ut hym to
deth.

2 And brought hym boundo, and de-
lyvered hym vnto Poncius Pylate, the
(lebyte.

3 Then when Judas wliich betniye<l
hym, sawe that he was condcmjjncd, he
repented iiim sylfc, and brought ageyne

i:,0

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[.St. Matt.

ti;^un8 siluliiinaizc gudyani, yah siuist-

lingas to dai?ra saccrda caldiiim.

aii),

4 Qijandfl, Frnwaurhta mis, ffalcwyands
]f|) cis qe|)un, Wlia kara

1»1()|) Hwikii.

iinsis] |ni witris.

5 Yah atwairimnds |>aim sihihi-am In

nlh, at]ai[>, yah galcil)ands ushailiah sik.

})ai

6 ij)

pjudyans nlmandans Jians
skattans, (|c}niii, Ni skuhl ist la^an
in kaurbanaun, untc andawair|»i
|)ans

blo|)i8 ist.

7 Cianmi |>an nimandans, us])anhtcdnn
ns {'aim |>ana akr kasyius, du usfilhan
ana gastiui.

8 Du|>}>c liaitans warj) akrs yains akre

blo)>is, und hina dag.

9 pannh usfulhioda, pata qijmno |>airh
lairainuan praufetu, (|i|>andan, Yah us-
ncniun jirins tiguns .sihd)roinaizc, and-
>vair|>i jiis wairjmdina, |)atei garahnidcdun
frani sunnni Israelis ;

10 Yah atgcbun ins und akra kasyins,

swaswc anabau|) mis Frauya.

11

i|) icsus 8to|) faura kindina ; yah
frah ina sa kinihns, ({i)>ands, ))u is [>iud-
!)> Icsus cjaj) du iinmu, pu
ans ludaic ?

qi|>is.

1 2 Yah ini|)J)anri

wrolii}i8 was fram
I'aiin gudyam, yah sinistam, ni waiht
andhuf.

13 panuh qa|» (hi Tmma Pcilatus, Niu
hauscJH, wluin fdu ana ['uk >vcitwod-
yand ]

ni

74 Yali

andliof I'mma >vi|>ra

ni
ninliun waurdc, 8wa.s\vc sihlalcikida sa
kin<Hns tilu.

If, And du1|> [lan wharyoh biuhts was
sa kindins fndetun ainana )>izai nianagcin
bandyan, |mnci wihleihin.

16 Ifabaidodunuh |ian bandyan, ga

tarhiihma liandjban.

4 And cwfcjj, Tc syngcnle, da ic scahic
Da cwa^don big,

diet rilitwise blod.
llwat Ri)r}'c8t du daet to ws ?
f, And lie liweaq) da BC}'llingiLS in on
diet tempi, and fcrdc, and mid gryno
liyiic sylfiie aheng.

6 Da 86|)licc dara saccrda enldras on-
fengon da*s scolfrcs. and cwa^dun, Nis
hyt na alyfc<l da't we ilseiidon hyt on
ure madm-cyste, furdani de hyt is bloiles
wur|>.

"

7 Hig worhton da gemot, and smca-
don hu hii:
'^ 'U da'S llaMeiidrs wur|»
u big a*iine acer mid
ateon, da u
dam feo tigcl-wyrhtena, on to bcbyrg-
cnnc ell^codisce men.

8 Fordam is se a?ccr gehaten Achel-
demah, da't is on ure gej'eode, blodes
a'ccr, and swa li-

' ••i^'.

"

*

*

'

: ^

9 Da wais g- ...... ...

is
|)urh Ilieremiam done witegaii, dus cwed-
ende, And hi onfcngon |>rittig seyllinga,
das gcbohtan wur{', done de was acr
gewur)M)d fram Isnihela beamum ;

:i

.

10 And big soaldtin da*t on tigel-wyrht-

cna a'ccr, swa swa I)rihten me fjesette.

11 Da stod se Ila-leiul iKAnaii dam
deman ; and se dema byne axotle, dus
cwedentle, I'^irt dii Iud«a cyning ? Da
cwa*|> 8e Ha^Ientl, Dat dii 8rg>t.

12 And mid dy de byne wrcg«lon da»ra
saeerda ealdras, and da blafordas, nan
|)ing be ue andswarcnle.

13 Da cwa»|> Pilatus to bim, No go-
bii fela sageua big ongean

byrest dii,
do 8ecgea|> 1

14 And be ne andw}*nlc miil niinum
wordc, swa daet sc dcma wundrmlc swiJ-
Hee.

15 II ig bn*rdon boom to gc\\*unan to
boora Hymbel-<ln*gc da^t se dcma HceoKlo
wdrhtno

'1 folce

big bai

11.

16 He ba'fde da s6|>lice scnne strangne
•I gcba'flne, se wa?s genemned

z........jl»as.

I 7 Gaqtnnanaim |»an im, qa|» Tm Pci-
IttiM, Whana wiUiji v\ fndotau izwis t
r>.u.il>ban, |au Itsu, saci iiaitada Clirist-
us?

17 Da da't folc gcsamnoil v

i

c\vn*|> Pilatus. HwaMlir wylle gc d.t t io
cow ligyfe I de P»amd»ban, dc done Ma'l-
cud, dc is Crist gehaten }

;

2

;

XXVII. 4-17.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

151

seluer to the princis of prestis, and to
the eldre men of the peple,

4 Seyinge, I haue synnecl, bitrayinge
iust blood. And thei seiden, What to
vs ? se thou.

5 And the platis of seluer cast awey in
the temple, he wente awey, and goyinge
awey he hangide hym with a grane.'*'

6 Forsothe the princis of prestis, taken
the platis of seluer, seiden, It is nat
leuefal to sende hem in to the tresorie,
for it is the pris of blood.

the XXX. plattes off sylver to the chefe
prestes, and senyoures,

4 Saynge, I have synned, betraynge
And they sayde,

the innocent bloud.
What is that to vs 1 se thou to that.

5 And he cast doune the sylver plates
in the temple, and departed, and went
and hounge hym sylfe.

6 The chefe prestes toke the sylver
plattes, and sayd. It is not lawfull for
to put them in to the treasury, because
it is the pryce of bloud.

7 Sothly counceil taken, thei bou5ten
with them the feeld of a potter, in to
byi'yinge of dead men.

7 And they toke counsell, and bought
felde, to bury

with them a potters
strangers in.

8 For this thing the ilk feeld is clepid
Acheldemak, that is, a feeld of blood,
til in to this day.

9 Thanne it is fulfillid, that thing that
is seid by the prophete Jeremye, sey-
ynge. And thei token thritty platis of
syluer, the pris of a man preysid, whom
thei preysiden of the sonys of Yrael

11

10 And thei ^auen hem in to the feeld
of a potter, as the Lord ordeyned to me.
KSothely Jhesus stood byfore the
meyre;"*" and the presedent axide hym,
seyinge, Art thou kyng of Jewis ] Jhesus
seitli to hym. Thou seist.

12 And whenne he was acusid of the
princes of prestis, and eldre men of the
peple, he answeride no thing.

13 Than Pilat seith to hym, Herist
thou nat, hou many witnessyngis thei
seien a^einus thee 1

14 And he answeride nat to hym to
eny word, so that the presedent won-
dride gretely.

15 Forsothe by a solcmpne day the
presedent was wont for to delyuere to
pei)le oon boundcn, whom thei
the
wolden.

16 Forsothe he haddc a noble man

8 Wherfore that felde is called the felde

of bloud, vntyll this daye.

9 Then was fullfylled, that which was
spoken by Jeremi the prophet, sayinge,
And they toke xxx. sylver plates, the
value of him that was prysed, whom
they bought of the chyldren of Israhel

I o And they gave them for the potters

felde, as the Lorde appoynted me.

I I Jesus stode before the debite ; and
the debite axed him, saynge, Arte thou
the kynge of the lewes 1
Jesus sayd
vnto hym. Thou sayest.

1

When he was accused of the chefe
preestes, and senioures, he answered
nothinge.

13 Then sayd Pilate vnto him, Hearcst
thou not, howe many thinges they laye
ayenste the 1

14 And he answered him to never a
worde, in so moche that the dcbyte
marveylled very sore.

15 Att that feest tlie dcbyte was wonto
to deliver vnto the pcplc a presoner,
whom they woldc chose.

J 6 He hade then a notable presoner,

bounden, that was seid IJarabas.

called Barrabas.

17 Thcrfore Pilat seid to liem gcdrid
to gidrc, Whom wole jce, I Iccuc^ to
50U ] wher liarul^as, or Jhcsu, tliat is
seid Criut 1

17 And wlien they were gaddcrcd to-
g(;tlicr I'ilatc sayde vnto them, Whothor
wyll ye, tliut Y geve losse viito you ?
liarrubas, or Jesus, which is called Crysti

I,V2

GOTHIC, 360.

^ 18 Wissa auk, |»atci in nei|»ifl ati^'obun
Tno.

19 Sitandiii \^nn iini
iiisaiuliila du injina <j.
wailit I'Us )ali jmniiuu jj'amilitin

;

.la,

AXGLO-SAXON,995. [St. Matt.
18 He wi«tc 86|»Iice, da?t big Iivne for

aiidaii him scaKlon.

19 He sat da Tilatus on his (h')in-8ctle,

da scndc tiis wif to I
l»eo dc nan jiing ;;
^
rihtwisan; bC\>\Icc fda ic hal,Kc gejolod
to dapg, |mrh gcsyhpe, for hym.

;,

_

20 Da lacnlon da?ra sarordn oid«]rni
•odd
Bamii

.^'ii*. JKVM 111! iiiiin<i<)u.

jj

'

21 Da andwyrde sc denia and s.i'Je
heora, Hw««denie wylle ge dat ic f.ir-
gyfe cow of disum twam 1
Da rwa'.luu
hig, IJamihluui.

n, U.t^llice

22 Dacwn-)>Pilatr.-
hwrct do ic l»f .Im, |
gcncmned? Da cw»don hig .
y
he on rode ahangen.
23 Da cwa?b sc dema to heom, Witod-
hce hwa't yfeles dyde dc« ? Hi dzi sHiMor
clypodoi), dus cwedonde. Sy he almji_

,^ ^j,. ;^ r'r-I^t

-

'

•

•

24 Dii gcscah Pihitiis r!
fremotle, ac gcwurde n,
,|a
gonani he wa-ter. and |>w6h hvs'hamla
bcforan dam folce, antl cwr'|>, V,
ic com fram dyscs rihtwi-iiui 1.!
ge9co|T.

t ^c

^'j

,

'

'

25 Da P' '

cwa'|», Sy ;
beam.

26 n '^

'

':

,i..,.j

,.

.. ,1

.

,

J

^

•

if he hym IJarrahlMui, and
he It't swingau, and bcalde

~on da^ dcman ccmpan
.« dam dom erne, and

done 1
hcom to alionne.
^7 J^
^o»^' -
g^radermion ealnc done |'ro«t to htom.
28 And unscryddon hyue hys ligcnum
""C*^*^' ^^ '
' n hyue mid weolccn-
reaibim m
29 Antl wundon cvnc-helm of |>omum
Ion
ow
'^;.
l»cloran him. and liysmerodou hyno. dim
cwcdende. r '

""•'

^

^

'

'

'

•

'

•

brcod, and l>oi»ton hys heafcxl.
31 And after dam de hig h\-ne dus
bysmeriKlon. Im - ••
n-ildon hvne dam
scyccelsc, and ^
;, hyue mid h>-8 a-
gcuum rcafc, and U ddon hyue to ahonnc.

30 And ^,

:

\; ludca cyi
i hyue, and i.w.um.

;

1

;

XXVII. 18-31.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

153

18 Sotbely he wiste, that by enuye

18 For he knewe well, that for envy

thei betraieden hym.

19 Forsothe hym sittynge for iustise,'''
is wyf sente to hym, seyinge, No thing
J thee and to that iust man ; sothely I
aue suffrid this day many thingis for

hym, by a visioun.^

20 Forsothe the princis of prestis and
the eldre men tisiden^ to the peplis, that
thei shulden axe Barabas, but Jhesu
thei shulden lese.

21 Forsothe the president answerynge
seith to hem, Whom of the two wolen
5ee to be left"*" to 30U 1 And thei seiden,
Barabas.

22 Pilat seith to hem. What therfore
shal I do of Jhesu, that is seid Crist?
Alle seien, Be he crucified.

23 The presedent seith to hem, Sothely
what of yae\ hath he don ] And thei
crieden more, seyinge, Be he crucified.

24 Forsothe Pilat seynge that he pro-
fitide no thing, but the more noyse was
maad, water taken, washide the hondis
byfore the peple, seyinge, I am innocent^
fro the blood of this iust man ; se 5ee.

25 And al the peple answerynge seide,
His blood vpou vs, and on oure sonys.

26 Thanne he lefte to hem Barabas,
but he toke to hem Jhesu scourgid,
that he shulde be crucified.

27 Tlianne kni3tis of the president tak-
ynge Jhesu in the mote halle, gedriden
to hym alle the cumpanye of kui3tis.

28 And thei vnclothinge hym, diden
boute hym a rede mantel

•

they had delyvered hym.

19 When he was sett doune to geve
iudgement, his wyfe sent to hym, say-
inge. Have thou nothinge to do with
that iuste man ; I have suffered many
thinges this daye in my slepe, about
hym.

20 The chefe preestes and the seniours
had parswaded the people, that they
shulde axe Barrabas, and shulde destroye
Jesus.

2

The debite answered and sayde vnto
them, Whether of the twayne will ye
that I lett loosse vnto you 1 And they
sayde, Barrabas.

22 Pilate sayde vnto them, What shall
I do then with Jesus, which is called
They all sayde to hym, Lett
Crist'?
hym be crucified.

•

•

•

23 Then sayde the debite, What evyll
And they cryed the

hath he done 1
more, saynge, Lett him be crucified.

24 When Pilate sawe that he prevayled
nothinge, butt that moare busenes was
made, he toke water, and wasshed his
hondes before the people, sayinge, I am
innocent of the bloud of this iuste per-
son ; and that ye shall se.

25 Then answered all the people and
sayde. His bloud fall on vs, and on oure
children.

26 Then lett he Barrabas loosse vnto
them, and scourged Jesus, and delyvered
him to be crucified.

27 Then the soudeours of the debite
toke Jesus vnto the comen hall, and
gaddered vnto him all the comi)any.

28 And stripped hym, and put on hym

a purpyll roobe

29 And thei foldynge a crowne of
thornis, puttiden on his hcued, and a
ri3t bond ; and the knee
reed in lii.s
l)Owi(U bifore hym, thei sconiyden hym,
8eyin;,'e, Ilayle, kyng of Jewis.

30 And thei Hi)ittynge in to liym, token

a reed, and sniyten his heued.

31 And after tliat thei hadden scorned
liyin, tliei vnrl(»thi(l(!n liym of tlie mantel,
and tliei clotliiden hym witli liis clotliis,
and ledden hym for to crucifie.

29 And platted a crounc off thorncs,
and j)utt vi)pon hys heed, and a rede in
his ryght honde ; and ])()wcd
tlieirc
knees before him, saying, Ilayle, kingc
of the lewes.

30 And Ri)itted vppon liym, and toke

the rede, and smoote hym on the heed.

31 And when they liad mocked him,
they t<>k(! the rolx; off liyni ngeync, and
j)ut his awne reyment <>n him, and Iced
liym awaye to crucify liym.

j

f

l.'ii

(JOTUIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.

1

32 So|»lIcc rta lijj^ ut-fenlon, (\t\ pe-
nu'tton l)i«^ acnne C'yrcuiscnc man, cum-
enile hcom toj;cne«, dies nama w:i s
Symoii ; done hig iiyddon, dart lie ba-rc
liys roile.
33 Da comon Iii^ on da stowc de is
genemned Golgotha, da*t is, Heafodi>an-
nan stow,

34 And hig seal don h}in win drincan
; and da ho hys
w!(1 gr

"

1

..c hyt drincan.

onliyri;; .V, ... ........
35 So|)Hcc Hjfter dam de liig liync on
rode alicngon, liig toda'ldon hys reaf,
and wuq)on Idot daT ofcr, dat wecrc
gcfyllc'«l, diet de gecwedcn wa« )>urh
done witegan, and dus cwa^|», Hig to-
(hi'Mon hcom mine reaf, and ofer mine
reaf liig wurpon Idot.
36 And hig bchcoldon h}Tic sittende ;

37 And hig ajjctton ofer hys heaffxl hys
gylt, dus awritcnne, DIS IS 8E IliE'L-
EM), lUDKA ( YNING.

38 Da wa*rou ahanL;en mid hym twegen
8cea{ian, an on da swidran healfe, and
oder on da wynstrnn.
39 WitoiUice da w«'"^'''* "-^ " ' vne
hysmcrodon, and cweh:

<I,

40 And cwficdon, Wa, chi't tlos towyrj»}»
Godcs tempi, and on l^rim «lai:um hyt
eft getimbni}) ; geha'l mi de sylfue ; g)f
dii ay Godes sunu, ga nyder of daTC
rode.

4

ICac derm noerda esldras hyne by-
smeredon, mid dam IxScenim and mid
dam ealdnim, and •

'1.
, ..ud h\nie sylfno
gehalan ne mR»g ; g)f he Isnihela cjTi-
ing sy, g:l mi nyder of drcrc rode, and
we gelyfa|> hym ;

42 O'dere he gelui. .

43 lie gelyf|> on Got!, alyse he hjiio
witodlice he sa^de,

nu, g}f he wj'lle ;
Got!

n ic eom.

44

da Bcea^n, de mid him a-

hanj' '..< w.eron, hyne hysptlon.

4'y

Witoillicc fram diero sixtan tide
wa*ron gewunlen jjystru ofer ealle eor)»-
an, (Ml da nig«»|'an tid.

46 And ynd>e da nygojmn tid clypotle
e II a' lend
stcfiie, and dus
cwn*}>, lieli, Heli, lema zabdani, da't is

micelrc

4'

. Isniclis
Tst, aUtrii^'ftilau nu ftf |»niniim pil^in, ci
gfUMuiwliuima yah pilaul»yain iinma ;

4 { 'I'ruuaiila du Ctu|*a, laUHvadati nil
qa|» auk, patci Ciu|»8

Ina, yal»ai will ina ;
iiii Huiiim.

44 patuh giitno yah Jwi waitloilyant,
(tai ini)niMl)niiiudans iiniiia, idwcitidctluii
imina.

45

Fraiu Raihflton

|»an wheilai

war))
air|>ai, uud wheila ui-

n<|i8 iifar allai

uixlon.

46 i|i )>an l>i wlicila niundon ufliropida
Ilolci,

()i)>aiulH.

1(>NU8 Btilmai
tiiikititi.
llcici, lima 8ibak|>aiii,

|>utci

ist,

Ctu)>

;

;

;

XXVII. 32-46.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

155

32 Sotliely tliei goynge out, foimden a
man of Syrynen, cummynge fro a toun,
Symont by name ; thei constreyneden
hym, that he shulde take his crosse.

32 And as they cam out, they founde
a man of Cyi'cn, named Simon ; him
they compelled, to beare his crosse.

33 And thei camen in to a place that
is clepid Golgatha, that is, the place of
Caluarie.
34 And thei 5auen hym for to drinke
wiyn meyngid with galle ; and whenne
he had tastid, he wolde nat drinke.

35 Sothely after that thei hadden cru-
cified hym, thei departiden his clothis,
sendynge lot, that it shulde be fulfillid,
that is seid by the prophete, seyinge,
Thei departiden to hem my clothis, and
on my cloth thei senten lot.

33 And cam vnto the place which is
called Golgotha, that is to saye, a place
of deed mens seniles.
34 And they gave him veneger to
drynke myxte with gall ; and when he
had tasted there of, he wolde not drinke.
35 When they had crucified hym, they
parted his garmentes, and did cast lottes,
to fulfyll that was spoken by the pro-
phet. They have parted my garmentes
amonge them, and apon my vesture
have cast loottes.

36 And thei sittynge kepten hym

37 And thei puttiden on his heued the
cause of hym wryten, This is Jhesus of
Nazareth, kyng of Jewis.

38 Thanne two theeues ben crucified
with him, oon on the ri3t half, and oon
on the left half.

39 Forsothe men passynge forth blas-

femyden hym, moouynge her heuedis,

40 And seyinge, Vath,"*" that distroyist
the temple of God, and in the thridde
(lay bildist it a3ein ; saue thou thi self
5if thou art the sone of God, cunie doun
of the crosse.

41 Also and princis of prestis scorn-
ynge, with scribis and eldre men, seidcu,

42 He made other men saaf, he may
nat make hym self saaf ;
^if he is kyng
of Yrael, cume he nowe doun fro the
crosse, and we bileuen to hym ;
43 He trustith in God, dejyuere he
hym nowc, ^if he wole ;
forsothe he
scide, For I am Goddis sone.

44 Forsothe and the

thccuys, that
wercn crucified with hym, puttiden to
hym with rcpreuc the saino thing.

45 Sothely fro the sixte hour (l(n;nosHiH
ben maad on al the crthc, til to the
iiyncthc hour.

46 And about the nynthc houre Jhesus
criede with gretc voice, seyinge, Hely,
Hely, lamazabatany, that is, My God,

36 And they sate and watched hym

there
37 And they set vppe over his heed
the cause of his deeth written, This is
Jesus, the kynge of the lewes.

38 And there were two theves crucified
with hym, won on the right lionde, and
another on the lyfte honde.

39 They that passed by revyled hym,

waggynge ther heeddes,

40 And sayinge, Thou, that destroyest
the temple off God, and byldest it in
thre dayes ; save thy sylfe ; if thou be
the Sonne of God, come doune from the
crosse.

41 Lykwyse also the prelates mock-
inge hym, with the scribes and seniours,
sayde,

42 He saved other, hym sylfe he can
yff he be the kynge off Is-
not save ;
rahell, let hym nowe come doune from
the crosse, and we woU belcvc hym ;

43 He trusted in God, lett God delyver
hym nowe, yf he will have hym ; for he
sayde, I am the soniie ofi' God.

44 That same also the theves, which
were crucified with hym, cast in his
tctlic.

45 From the sixte houre was ther
(Icrcknes over all the londe, vnto the
nyiith houre.

46 And aljout the nynth houre Josus
cryed with a loudc voycc, sayinge, I'^li,
Kli, lain a salmthani, that is to saye, My

i:i6

GOTUIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mait.

mcins, Gu)> mcins, duwlic mis hilaist ?

47 1|> Rtimai |>izc yninar Ktnndiindanc,
llcliau

piliausyaiuluiiB,

(}e|)Uii,

putci

woi»fi|> sa,

48 Yali suns |>rarri(Ia ains us im, yah
nam swainin fullyands iikctis, yah lag-
yaiuls ana nius, draggkida iniL

49 \\>

jiai an|mrfti qeJMin, Let; ei sai-

wliani (|iinaiu llcliiis, nasyan ina

50 i|) lesus nftra hropyands stibnai

inikilai, ailailot ahinan.

51 Yah j'an faurliali alhs diskritnoda^
Yah air})a
'in twa, iu])a)>n> uiid dahi)>.
inrciraida, yah stuinus disskritnodcdun ;

52 Yali hiaiwasnos ushiknodcdun, yah
inai)a<4a Icika |)ize ligandaue wcihuizc,
urrisun.

53 Yali usgftjj^andans us hlaiwasnom,
nfar urrist
\k)
woihon ImurLT, ynh ataugidcdun sik man-

Tnnat;;a^'i,'an<huis

in

is

54 I}) hun<hifa|TS yah |mi nii|) ininm
witanchms losua, gasaiwliaiuhins |>o rrir-
<>n, yah |m) waur|>anona, ohtc«hm ah-
raba, (ji|>andaus, l>i sunyai Gu}>s sunus
I'st sa.

5/) Wosunuh jmn yainar qinons manai^-
os fairra|iro saiwliandeinH. |u»7.oi
hiisti-
dc«hin afar Icuia frani Galcihiia, and-
balityantK'ins ininia.

56 Jn Iminiti was Nfarya so Marrdalenc,
yah Marya so lakobis, yali losoz aijici,
yah ai|>ci siiniwo Zaibaidaiaus.

f,7

I|>

JNin

8ri|Mi

\vai|\

<j

gabigsaf An-iiMaj-aias. |.i/.uli I
Baei yah silba siponidu lesua.

•58 Sah ntgagpinds dti IVilatau, ba|> |>i8
))anuh IVilatiis usiaubida

Icikis lesuis.
giban |'ata Irik.

on En^rlisc, Min God, min God, to hwi
forlcto dii inc ?
47 So|>licc sume da de dtcr sUulon,
gchyrdon, cw»don, Kii he

and dis
cly|)a|> Heliani.
48 L)a hrRiUice am an hoora, and po-
nam anc spungean and fyldc big mid
ccttlc, and dsette an hrco<i dar on, and
seaidc h}*m drincan.

49 Witodlice da ('drc cwacdon, Ltct ;
uton geseon hwiudcr llcliau cume, and
wyllc hync Tdysan.

50 Da clypode se Hsclond eft micclrc

'

sti'fne, and osen<1
/Ist.
51 And dar i
<8 temples wah-
r}ft wear|) tosliten on twetren da^las,
And
fram ufr^
seo cor|>t
.urston ;
52 And byrgena wurtlon ge-openode,
and manige halige Hchaman dc a:r
slepon, aryson.

' m od n^
.., and st; :-

<\.

..

*

53 And da hig ut-eodon of dam b}Tg-
enum, n.»ftcr liys acryste big comon on
da haligan ccastre, and .'vtcowdou hig
manegum.

54 Witodlicc daps hundretles ealdor and
c

da de mid him wa^nm hi / '
lljelend, da hig gesawv»n da I
and da j^ing de dicr gcwnirdon,
iiig
ondrt'don boom |>carlc, and cwa?dun,
S6}>lice G(><les sunu wibs des.

^f,

'

'

55 Witodlioe drrr wwron mancga wif
feorran. da de fylij^tlon dam IIa*lendc
fram Galilea, him |H>nigendc

56 Rotwuh dam wirs seo Ma^dalenisee
lor, and
- sunona

ria Ian'
i. and /.

^'

'

I

^! ••'

!•

moder.

losep,

I

;,

•

:.

''Ice da byt a'fen w.i»s, com sum
III i>f Arimathia, da«s naina w.m
BC 8yl& WK*s
]IaMyn<leH

da^s

'hu

^ ..i-alwhtc to Pilate, and ba^l
Da het Pi-

da>fl lla^lendea liehnman.
latus agyfan him done licbamnn.

f,9 Yah niniiuuls |mta Icik, Kosof biwaiid

r\() Ami !<»<' " "-nam done licbamnn.

60 Ynli

Ita Habana ItrainyaMiina,
galagida itA
Hoiiinninin htaiwa. jmtei
htaina ; yah fatinvahvyanii
aninia dauruns jiis hlaiwis, galui)).

in niuyamma
!a nna
^ '

'

t niikil-

and bfwand :

d ela'nre seytan,

60 And h'de liyne on hys niwan byrj^-
ene. da he aheiiw on stane ; and ho
toawylte myeolne st-an to hlidc daTc
byrgene, and fcnlc syddan.

;

;

XXVIL47-60.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

my God, wherto^ hast thou forsaken
mee ?
47 Sothly summen stondynge there,
and heerynge, seiden, This clepith Hely.

48 And anon oon of hem rennynge,
fillide a spounge taken with aycel,"*" and
puttide to a reed, and 5aue to hym for
to drinke.

49 But other seiden, Suffi-e thou ; see
"we wher Hely cumme, delyuerynge
hym.

TYNDALE, 1526.

157
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me?

47 Some of them that stode there,
when they herde that, sayde. This man
calleth for Helias.

48 And streyght way won off them
ranne, and toke a sponge and filled it
full of veneger, and put it on a rede,
and gave hym to drynke.

49 Other sayde, Let be; let vs se
whyther Helias wyll come, and delyver
hym.

50 Forsothe Jhesus eftsones cryynge

50 Jesus cryed agayne with a lowde

with grete voice, sente out the spirit.

5 T And loo ! the veile of the temple is
kitt^ in to two parties, fro the hei^est
til doun. And the erthe is moued, and
stoonys ben cleft

52 And biriels ben openyd, and many
bodies of seintes that slepteu,''' rysen
a3ein.
53 And thei goynge out of her biriels,
after his resureccioun camen in to the
holy citee, and apeeriden to manye.

54 Treuly centurio and thei that weren
with hym kepinge Jhesu, the moouynge
of the erthe seen, and thoo thingis that
weren done, dredden greteli, seyinge,
Verrely this was Goddis sone.

55 Forsothe there weren there many
wymmen afer, that suedcn Jhesu fro
Galilee, mynystrynge to hym.

voyce, and yelded vppe the goost.

51 And beholde !

the vayle of the
temple was rent in two i)arties, from
the toppe to the bottom. And the erth
did quake, and the stones did rent
52 And graves

open, and the
bodies oflf many saynctes which slept,
arose.
53 And cam out off their graves after
his resurreccion, and cam in to the holy
cite, and appered vnto many.

did

54 "When the pety captayne and they
that were with hym watchinge Jesus,
sawe the erth quake, and those thynges
which hapened, they feared
greatly,
sayinge, Off a surete this was the sonne
off God.

55 And many wemen were there be-
holdinge hym a farre off, which folowcd
Jesus from Galile,
ministringe vnto
hym.
56 Amonge the which was Mary Mag-
dalen, and Mary the mother off James,
and the mother of Joses, and the mother
off Zebedes chyldren.
57 When the even was come, there
cam a rychc man off Aramathia, named
Joseph, which same also was Jesus
disciple.

58 He went to Pilate, and begged the
body of Jesus. Then Pihitc commaundcd
the body to be dclivenid.

59 And Josej)!! toke the body, and

wrapped it in a clcnc lynnync clooth,

60 And j)ut

it in his ncwc tonibe,
which lie had Ijcwcn out even in tiu;
rokc ; and rolled a grcate stone to the
(lore of the scpulcrc, and departed.

;

ITiB

GOTHIC. 360.

61 Wnsuh |mn yninnr Marvn ^fa^;^la1cnc
yah so aii))ara Marya, Bitaiidcins uiid-
>vair)>ifl jmninm hiaiwa.

62 Iftuniin |)an -'

'

nskaiwrin, •,'aqeui
yuus yah FareititticU du I'ciluUu,

far pnr-
>-> gud-

63 Qi|)ftndans, Frauya, gamundediiiTi,
|>atei yains airzyands qa[» nauh lihands,
Afar ]n\i\s dagans urrcisa.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Matt.
61 ?)a»r WW9 B6|»lice w»o Y '"^'niscc
Maria and seo odcr Maria
da?re byrgcnc.

le a't

62 \Vito<llice odrum dirge, dc w.t«
gearcung-da?g, conion
(la»ra
sacerda ealdras and da Sundur-haigan
to Pihite,

toj.ii'ilere

63 And cwacdon, Illaford, we gomunon,
dirt sc swica sscde da he on life waes,
Alhcr |>rym dagon ic arise.

64 Halt nu witan |>amnia lilaiwa und
|ana |>ndyan dag ;
il»ai ufto (pinandans
jiai siponyos is, binimaina iiiiina, yah
(|i|)aiiia du inana;,'oin, Urrais us (huijiaim ;
yah ist so spcidizci airzij^a
waii*sizci
I'izai frumein.

64 Hat nu heahlan da •bjTgene od
done l:r}-ddan da-g ; de-la»s liys Itoming-
cnihtas cunion, and forsti'lon hyne. and
sccgcon dam {o\cc, dnit he aryse of
(K'aJMj ; donne hy|» da.! fcftere gedwyld
wyi-sc donne da't acrre.

65 Qa|> im reilatus, nal)ai|> wardyans;

gaggi|>, witaiduh swaswe kunnuj).

^16 tj)

hlaiw, faursiglyaiidaus |)ana ...

cifl gaijgandans, galukun )mta

65 Da cwaej) Pilatus, Ge ha]»])a|) heonl-
fara|», and heaUlaj) swa swa

nedoiine ;
gc wit on.

66 S6|)h*cc hig ferdon, and ynilie-tnkm-
1 da hyrgcnc, an<l insegloilon done

^

i

bU.u, mid dam wcardum.

Chap. XXVIII.^ i S6|>Hce dam reste-
dn>ge8 tefene, se de onHhte on dam
forinan rosto-dirge, com seo Mag<lalcn-
isco Maria, atul seo oder Mana, d:i*t liig
wohlon geseon da h}Tgene.

2 And *

'

' cor)*-

:

bifung ;
;i-tali
of heofonan, and genealielite anil awylto
done Stan, and Met d«r on up|>aii.

^

3 Ilys ansyn WfM swylcc ng}i, and

hys rraf swa hwite Bwa snaw ;

4 WitoiUice da we«rda8 wwron afyrhte,
and WATon gcwordene iwj'lee hig deadc
wa^ron.

f, Da andstrnr '

rp] ^rid Rg^de
dam wifon, No
< cow, ic wat
wittxlhce d»t ijc 8ecea|> done llsclend,

~' r-

<n wir«
>, sojtHcc 8wa swa
he svdc ; cuma)>, and ge9eo)> da stowe,
de 80 Hirlond w.ts onalcd.

7 And fara|» liraHllice, and secgca)) hys
U^oming-cnihtum, dirt he aras. And
8('»|)licc he cym}> l>ef6ran eow on Gali-

;

XXVII.6i.-XXVIIL7.]WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

159

61 Forsothe Marye Mawdeleyne and
an othere Marye weren there, sittynge
a^eins the sepulcre.

62 Sothely on the tother day, that is
after pascke euenynge, the princis of
prestis and Pharisees canien to gidere
to Pilate,

6^ Seiynge, Sire, we han mynde, for
tlie ilke traitour"*" sayde 5it lyuynge,
Aftir thre dayes I shal ryse a^en.

64 Therfore comaunde thou the sepul-
cre to be kept til in to the thridde day;
lest perauenture his disciplis comen, and
stelen him, and seyen to the peple. He
is risun fro deetli ; and the laste errour
schal be worse than the formere.

65 Pilat seith to hem, 3© han the

kepinge ; go ^e, kepe 5e as ^e kunnen.

66 Forsoth thei goynge forth, kepten^
the sepulcre, markinge"*" the stoon, with
keperis.

61 There was Mary Magdalene and
the other Mary, sittinge over aj^enste
the sepulcre.

62 The nexte daye, that foloweth good
frydaye, the hye prestes and Pharises
got them selves to Pilate,

63 And sayde, Syr, we remember, that
this deceyver sayde whyll he was yet
alyve. After thre dayes Y wyll aryse
agayne.

64 Commaunde therfore that the sepul-
cre be made sure vntyll the thyrd daye;
lest paraventure his disciples come, and
steale hym awaye, and saye vnto the
people. He ys rysen from dceth ; and
then the laste erroure shalbe worsse
then the first was.

65 Pilate sayde vnto them, Take watche
men ; go, and make ytt as sure as ye
can.

66 They went, and made the sepulcre
sure with watche men, and sealed the
stone.

Chap. XXVIII.

i Forsothe in the
euenyng of the saboth,''^ that schyneth
in the firste day of the woke, Marie
Mawdcleyn cam, and another Marie, for
to se the sepulcre.

2 And lo !

thcr was maad a greet
erthe mouyng ; forsoth the aungel of
the Lord cam doun fro heuene, and
comynge to tumide awey the stoon, and
sat theron.

3 Sothli his lokyng was as leyt, and

liis clothis as snow ;

4 Forsothe for drede of him the kcpcris
ben afferid, and thei ben maad as deede
men.

5 Forsothe the aungel answcringc seidc
to the wymmcn, Nylc 3c drcde, for I
woot tliat 30 seken Jhcsu, that is cruci-
fied ;

6 lie is not here, sothli he roos, as lie
seidc ; come 30, and secth the place,
where the Lord was putt.

7 And 3c goynge sonc, soic to his dis-
ciplis and to Petrc, for he hatli riHun.
And lo ! he schal go biforc 30U in to

Chap. XXVIII.

i The saboth daye
att even, which dauneth the morowe
after the saboth, Mary Magdalene, and
the other Mary cam, to se the sepulcre. .

2 And beholde ! there was a greate
erth quake ; for the angell of the Lorde
descended from heven, and cam and
ro wiled backe the stone ffrom the dore,
and sate apon it.

3 His countenaunce was lyke lyght-
nyngc, and his rayment whytc as snowe ;
4 For fearc of hym the kcpers were

astunnyed, and were as deed men.

5 The angell answered and sayde to
the wemcn, Fcare ye not, I knowe wclc
ye sekc Jesus, which was crucified

6 He is not Iierc, he is rysen, as he
sayde ; comc^ and so the place, where
the Lorde was put.

7 And goo quickly, and tell his dis-
ciples, that he is rysen from dceth.
And beholde! lie wyll go before you

IGO

GOTHIC, 360.

1

ANGLO SAXON. 995.

[St. Matt.

Icain ; ilapr gc hyne gc«eo|>. Nu! ic sccgc
eow.*

8 })a fcnion hig ljnr><llicc from d.-rre
liyr^'cnc, mid c«^rc ami mid niyolum
^'cfcun, and iinmn and cyjdon hyt liy;!
Iconiingcnilitiim.
9 And cfnc! da r

' ud on;:^an
lii^', and cwnp|>,
Hi;;
gcncala'hton, and jjcnamon hys fct, and
to him ge-cadii '

jrc.

^'

'

'

1

1

10 Da cwn?|i

l Itnd to hcnm, Xo
ondra'dc gc cow ;
fan»|>, and cyda|>
mlmun gcbr<Mlnim, dat lii^' faron on
Galilcam ;

da.'r liig gesooj) me.

Da da big ferdon, dii comon frame
da weardas on da cea/?trc, and cydiKin
dara sacerda ealdnim calle da |)i'ng dc
diLT gewordene wa^ron.

1

12 J)n gc8amno<lon da caldraa big,
and worhton gemot, and Bcaldon dam
JHgnum mi eel feoh,

Icorniii

13 And cwacdon, Sccgca|>, d«?t hv8
r, nihtcs, and for-
I pcm.

'

sta-lon

14 And g}-f se dt-ma dis gcnc8a)i, we

la'ra|> liyue, and gedoji eow sorhleasc.

15 Do onfengon liig diM feoa, and
dydon, oallswH
hig gil{crc<lc wapron.
And dis word wn^s gewidma'rsod mid
ludeum, od disnc an«lwiardan dn>g.^

16 Da ferdon da cndlufen leoniing-
cnihtas on done miint, daT 8C Hielend
hcom dihttf.

17 And h}*nc d«?r gcsawon, and liig to
him ge-eadmeddon ; wiUxllicc sumc big
tweonedoD.

18 Da gcncala'btf*

Ha^lond, and
Bpra?c to hym daa |>ing, on<l dua cwa»|»,
Me is gcseald wlc anweald, on beofonnn
and on eorjtan.

8c

and fulligea|>

19 Fani|> wito<llico and lirra|>

calle
big on naman
|>c(Mla,
FaMler, and Suna, and das Halu'an
Ctastos ;

20 And lirra|» dn t

lii:: lualdon calle
da bing, do ic cow belK'ad ; an«l ic boo
miu eow calle clagas, od wonildc gc-
cndungc

Amen.

;

5
1

;

!

XXVIII. 8-20.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

161

Galilee ; there ^e schulen se him.
I haue bifore seid to 50U.

Lo !

8 And Marie Mawdeleyn, and another
Marie wenten out soone fro the buryel,
with drede and greet ioye, rennynge
for to telle his disciplis.

9 And lo ! Jhesus ran a^ens hem, sey-
Forsothe thei cam en to,
inge, Heil ^e.
and heelden his feet, and worschipiden
him.

10 Thanne Jhesus seith to hem, Nyle
5e drede ; go 5e, telle ^e to my britheren,
that thei go in to Galilee; there thei
schulen se me.

11 The whiche whanne thei hadden
gon, loo ! summe of the keperis camen
in to the cytee, and tolden to the princes
of prestis alle thingis that weren don.

12 And thei gedrid to gidre with the
eldere men, a counceil takun, 3aue to the
kny3tis plenteuous money,

13 Seyinge, Seie ^e, for his disciplis
camen by ni5te, and han stolen him, vs
slepinge.

14 And if this be herd of the pre-
sedent,^ we schulen conceile him, and
make 50U sikir.

15 And the money takun, thei diden,
as thei weren tau3t. And this word is
pupplissid at the Jewis, til in to this
day.

J 6 Forsothe enlcuene disciplis wenten
in to Galilee, in to an hil, where Jhesus
hadde ordeyned to hem.

17 And thei seynge him, worschip-

iden ; sothli summe of hem doutiden.

18 And Jhesus comynge to, spak to
hem, seyinge, Al power is 30uun to me,
in heuene and in erthe.

into Galile; there ye shall se hym. Lo !
I have tolde you.

8 And they departed quickly from
the sepulcre, with feare and great joye,
and did runne to bringe his disciples
werdo.

9 And as they went to tell his disci-
ples, beholde ! Jesus mett them, sayinge,
God spede you. They cam, and held hym
by the fete, and worshipped hym.

10 Then sayde Jesus vnto them. Be
not afrayde ; go, and tell my brethren,
that they goo into Galile ; and there
shall they se me.

1

When they were gone, beholde
some of the kepers cam in to the cite,
and shewed vnto the prelattes all thinges
whych had hapened.

12 And they gaddered them togedder
with the senioures, and toke counsell,
and gave large money vnto the souders,
disciples
cam be nyght, and stoole hym awaye,
whyll ye slept.

13 Saynge, Saye, that his

14 And yf this come to the rulers
eares, we wyll pease him, and make you
safe.

1

And they toke the money, and did,
as they were taught. And this saynge
is noysed amonge the Jewes, vnto this
daye.

16 Then the xi. disciples went there
waye into Galile, in to a mountayne,
where Jesus had appoynted them.

17 And when they sawe hym, they
but some of them

worshipped hym ;
douted.

18 Jesus came, and spake vnto them,
saynge. All power ys geven vnto mo,
in heven and in erth.

19 Thcrfore ^e goynge teche alle folkis,
cristenyngc hem in the name of the
Fadir, and of the 8one, and of the
Hooly Gost

20 Tecljingc hem for to kopo alle
thingiH, what euerc tliingis I haue com-
aundid to 30U ; and lo ! I am with ym
in alle dayes, til tiie cndyng of the world.

T 9 Goo therefore and tcache all nacions,
l)aptisynge them in the name of the
Father, and the Sonne, and the Holy
Goost

20 Teachinge them to observe

all
thyngcs, whatsoever I commuunded you;
and lo ! I am with you all wayc, even
vntyll the cndc off tlie worlde.

AIWAGGELYO

D.ET GODSPKLL

|)AIUI1

iEFTER

MAUKU ANASTODEir.

MARCUS GERECEDN'ESSE.

CllAP. I.

I Anastodeins niwnggcl-

yons iesuis Christaus, sunuus Guj'S.

Chap. I.

i Her ys g6<lspcllcs angj-n

Ilackndcs Criates, Godea suna.

2 Swc gftinelil'ist in Esiiiin, praufctnu,
Sai! *ik lusamlya n«;iplu mcinana faura
)>us, sac'i gainan\vci|) wig |H.'iuana faura

3 Stibna wopyandins in au|>idai, >fan-
waurkei|>

\vci|> wig FrauyinH, raihtoa
8tui;;«)9 (Jn|>s unsaris.

4 Was loliannes dsiupyamlji in anjiidai,
idrcigos, du

yah nuryands

ilaupcin

t//^ aflaixiinai frawaiirhtr.

r, Yah usiddyeduu du imnift all ludaia-
yali daupidai
laud, yah lairusaulwnicis ;
in laurdane awliai fram
WLSuii
iiiuiia, audluiitandans frawaurhtim scin-
aim.

allai

6 Wasu|>-|>an loliani)'

him iilliandaus, yali
Imp hfinana ; yah niatida |»ramstcin8,
yah inilij'

^.

<^

li

'

7 Yah mor.

j, uuU, Qimi|> 8win|>oBa
miH sa afar mis, |>i7.ei ik ni im WHir)«
skAudaraip
analineiwanda
skollC 18.

andl)indan

H A)»|mn ik daiipya Trwis in watin ;

i[)

18 danpeij) izwia iu Ahmiu Weihamma.

9 Yah war|» in yainoim «lniram. qftni
>ah

Itsus fn\m
dauj)i)'s waa frum luhannc in ianrdanc.

Na7j»rHi|»

(i^

2 Swii awritcn is on da» witegan bee
Isaiani, Nu 1
ic asondc minne cngel
gcgcarwa|>
ansyne,
htforan
dinno wofj heforan tie.
3 Clyi>igcnde stefen on aam westcnc,
Gegcar^'iaj) Drihtnca wcg, d6|) rihtc his

dinrc

sc

aiclas.

4 lohannes wjps on wcstonc fulligcndc,
ide dacd-botc fulwiht, on synna

ail'

for.,.

>€.

5 And to him fenlc call ludcisc rice,
and calle Hirro8«»lima-waro; and wa-ron
fram him gefulUnle on lonJaucs fl«.*)do,
hyra synna auddctcndc.

6 And lohannoa wirs gcacryd mid
oluondcs ha'nim, and frllcn g}Tdcl wa^
}inl>c his Irndenu ; and gKnUfiaii, and
wudu hunig ho n-t,

7 Ami he IkmIixIc, and cwie|», Strcngra
c)Tn}> R'fter me, dica ne com ie w>-n1i'
|>wanga bugendt-
da't

his aceona

ic

uncn^'tte.

8 Ic fuUige eow on WKtcrc ; he cow

fuUa)) on llalgum Qastc

9 And on dam dagnm, com sc Iliclond
fram Nazareth Galilee, and wa-a gc-
fuUod on lordanc fram lohaunc.

10 Y'oh guns UBtrnjrcftndfl us |>ftmma
ns,

'

'

'

"m, gaKawli nsl»
_\.... Ahnian mwi- a'

iia

lo And aona of dam wn^tere, he tjr-
md lliiligne Ga^t -
, and on him wui.

openo '
culfrnii

*"

.

'

.!i

iua.

code.

;

HERE BTGTNNETH

THE GOSPEL

OF

MARK.

THE GOSPELL

*

OFF

S. MARKE.

Chap. I.

i The bigynnynge of the

gospel of Jhesu Crist; the sone of God.

2 As it is writun in Ysaie, the pro-
phete, Lo ! I sende myn angel bifore thi
face, that schal make thi weye redy
bifore thee.

3 The voice of oon cryinge in desert,
Make 3e redy the weye of the Lord,
make 5e his pathis ri^tful.

4 Jhon was in desert baptisynge, and
prechinge the baptym of penauuce, in
to remiscioun of synnes.

5 And alle men of Jerusalem wenten
out to him, and al the cuntre of Judee ;
and weren baptisid of him in the flood
of Jordan, knowlechinge her synnes.

6 And John was clothid with heeris of
camelis, and a girdil of skyn abowte his
leendis ; and he eet locustus, and hony
of the wode,
7 And i)rcchide, seyinge, A strengere
than I schal come aftir me, of wliom I
knelingcam not worthi for to vndo^ the
thwong of his schoon.

8 I haue baptisid 50U in water ; for-
Bothc he shal baptise 30U in the Holy
Goost.

9 And it is don in tlioo daycs, Jhesus
came fro Nazaretli of Galilee, and was
baptisid of Joon in Jordan.

10 And anoon he styingc vp of the
water, 8ay3 houencs opcnyd, and the
Holy Goost cummynge doun
a
culuere, and dwcllynge in hym.

as

Chap. I.

i The begynnyng off the
gospell of Jesu Christ, the sonne off
God.

2 As yt ys written in the prophettes,
Beholde ! I sende my messenger before
thy face, whych shall prepare thy waye
before the.

3 The voyce of won that cryeth in the
wildernes. Prepare ye the waye off the
Lorde, make his pathes streyght.

4 Jhon did baptise in the wyldernes,
and preache the baptim of repentaunce,
for the remission of synnes.

5 And all the londe off lewry, and
they of Jerusalem went out vnto hym ;
and were all baptised of hym in the
ryver
theire
synnes.

knowledgynge

Jordan,

6 Jhon was clothed with cammylles
beer, and wyth a gerdyll off a bcestes
skyn about hys loynes ; and he ate
locustes, and wylde hony,
7 And preached, saynge, A stronger
then I commeth after me, whos shue
latchett I am not worthy to stoupe
doune and vnlose.

8 I have baptised you with water

but he shall baptise you with the Holy
Goost.

9 And yt cam to passe in those daycs,
that Jesus cam from Nazareth a cite
of Gallic, and was baptised of Jhon in
Jordan.

10 And immcdiatly he cam out of the
water, and sawe the hevens ()])cn, and
the Holy Goost desccndingc vppon iiyui
lykc a dove.

M a

;

1

;

ir,4

(JOTIIIC, 360.

1 I Yjili Ktihna «ju!m uh liimiiiuiu. |Vi is
wjiilu

}u/.ti

liiii-a.

111

s;i

Bunus iiK'iim
guleikaida.

12 Ynli suns siii AUm:i ina ustuuh in

&u|)ida.

|>i7.ai

13 Yali wa8 ill

auJMilai dage
fi«hvor ti<,nins, fniisans fniiii Satanin, yah
wjiM nii|> <liuza\ji, yah aggiltis anl»ahti-
duilun inima.

14 ](|> afar jmtei atjjihaiis war|> lohan-
noH, (|ain tcsus iu (Jalrihiia, nicryoiiJs
uiwa;,'m-lyon |)iutlanganly()H (iu|>8,

15 (^ijiands, patci usfuUnoihi |>ata mcl,

yah atncwliichi sik |>iu<lani,'anli
C!u|'S
idrcigo}', yali galaul)(.l|> in aiwaggelyon.

iC) Yah wliarhonds faiir marein Oahi-
laias, gasawh Scimouu, yali Aiulriiian
Seiinonis, wairpandans
brojiar is,
nati in marein ; wesun auk fiskyans.

\>\a

17

Yali (|a))

lesus, Hiryats afar
niiH; yali gatauya igiiis wair[>an nutans

nil

niainu'.

iH Yah suns aflctandans |>o uatya scina,

laistidi'dun afar iuinia.

19 Yah yain}>ro inngaigpmds framis
iakt»l)U |mna Zaihai-
leitilata, Lfasawh
daiauH, yah lohannc, liro)>ar is, yah juins
in skipa nianwyandaus natya.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

11 And da wits stefn f' ^

peworden, Dii cart min g»
on dc ic pclicode.

r«num
>unu,

12 And sona Ga«t hine on wi'ston

genydde.

13 And he on wcstcne waw feowcrtig
da'^a and fcowerti^ nihta, and he wa**
frani Satane gecostnod, and he mid wild-
deorum wjrs, and him englas [>enodon.

14 Syddan Iohannt-8 geseald wits, com
se Hcclend on Galileam, Gixlea rices
godspell bo<ligende,

15 And dus cwedende, \Vito<llJ(''e t'd is
-• w ; d6[>

gofylled, and hcofena rirc pr
dajd-bote, and gelyfa|> dan.

lie.

'

'

*•

16 All! '• •

vid (ia Calileiscan
III, and Andrcam,
sa*, he u
his brodor, h}Ta nett on da sa> Ivtcude ;
8o|>licc hi wa'ron fisceras.

17 And da cwa[> se llaclmd, Cuma}>
ff'ftcr me ; and ic do iuc daa g)t beoj*
sawla onfondc.

18 And hi da hripdlice him fyligdon,

and forleton heora nett.

19 And danon liwon agan, he gcscah
lacobum ZeWdei, and
lohannes hia
brodor, and hi on hcora 8C}i)e bcora
nett logodon.

20 Yah suns haihait ins ; yah aflot-
andans attan
seinana, Zaihaidaiu, 'in
))amnia skijia niij) osnyain, gali)>uu afar

20 And he lii Bona ch*piHle ; and hi
heoni fanler, Zebedeo, on 8ci|>c forleton
mid hyrlingum,

ininia.

21

Yidi

^idi}Min

in Kafamaum, yah
suns sahhati) ilaga galci|>ands in swn-
agttgon. laisida ins.

22 Yah usfilniana waur))un ana )>izai
laiseinai is ; unto was laisyands Ins, swc
waldufni liahamls, yah ni swaswe )nu
ln»kary(>s.

23 Yah was in

)>i/ai Bwnn(;o^on 1x0
manna in unhriiinyunima ahmin, yah
ut liiopida,

24 (^ijmnds. Fralot, wha uns yah )iU8,
uns?

Trsn Na/uHMiai ? «|amt fni'
kunn I'uk whas )>u is, sa wtii... '...,:(.

Qf^ Yah andbait ina Tcsiiti, qi)mnds
Jhihai. yiUi usgagg ut us )uimuia, aluua
unhrainya.

2

rest

And fcnlon to Cafamaum, and stma
11 he li^rde hi, on gesamnunge

ingitiiL," ...li.'.

22 And hi wundre<lon be his liirc

86|>lice he wn^ lii Ivrende, swa 8C do
AQWcald hKf|>, na'S swa boccras.

a3 And on heora gwammmgc wjca
8um man on unclapnum gii^te, and he
hrynule,

24 And cwip|», Eala Xarjirenisca Ha?l-
eoin dii us
ic W.It dil rart (JodrH

ond. hwa't is us and de )
to forSpillaUUe ?
halga.

i -, Da ciihle se Hiplond him. and cwaj^,

Aduuiba, and ga of disum men.

4
8
3

6
7
1

tli-25.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

165

11 And a voys is maad fro heuenes,
Thou art my soue loued, in thee I haue
plesid.

12 And anon the Spirit puttide hym

in to desert.

1

And he was in desert fourty dayes
and fourty ni5tis, and was temptid of
Sathanas, and was with beestis, and
angelis mynystriden to hym.

1

Forsothe after that Joon was taken,
Jhesus came in to Galilee, prechinge
the gospel of the kyngdam of God,

15 And seijmge, For tyme is fulfillid,
and the kyngdam of God shal come
ni5 ; forthinke 3ee,''' and bileue ^ee to
the gospel.

16 And he passynge bisidis the see of
Galilee, say Symont, and Andrew, his
brother, sendynge nettis in to the see j
sothely thei weren fishers.

17 And Jhesus seide to hem. Come
I shal make 30U to be

5ee after me ;
maad fishers of men.

1

And anoon the nettis forsaken, thei

Bueden hym.

19 And he gon forth thennes a litil,
say James of Zebede, and Joon, his bro-
ther, and hem in the boot makynge
nettis.

20 And anoon he clepide hem ; and
Zebede, her fadir, left in the boot with
hu'id seruauntis, thei sueden hym.

21 And thei wenten forth in to Cafar-
naum, and anoon in the sabotis he gon
yn into the synagoge, tau3te hem,

22 And thei wondredcn on his tech-
yiige ; sothely he was tcchynge hem, as
hauynge power, and not as scribis.

23 And in the synagoge of hem was a
man in an vnclenc spirit, and he cricde,

24 Scyinge, What to vs and to thee,
thou JhcHU of Nazareth?
Iiaste thou
cumnien bifore the tyme for to doHtroic
vs'? Y woot that thou art the holy of
God.

25 And JhcHiis thrctcnydc to hym,
Boyingo, Wexe dowml), and go out of
the mah.

1

And there cam a voyc^ from heven,
Thou arte my dere sonne, in whom I
delite.

12 And immediatly the Sprete drave

hym into a wildernes.

13 And he was there in the wildernes
xl. dayes, and was tempted off Satan,
and was with wylde beestes, and the
angels ministred vnto hym.

14 After that Jhon was taken, Jesus
cam in to Galile, preachynge the gospell
ofi" the kyngdom of God,

15 And saynge. The tyme ys ful come,
and the kyngdom of God is even att
honde ; repent, and beleve the gospell.

1

As he walked by the see of Galile,
he sawe Simon, and Andrfewe, his bro-
ther, castinge nettes in to the see ; for
they were fysshers.

1

And Jesus sayde vnto them, Folowe
me ; and I wyll make you to be fysshers
of men.

18 And they strayght waye forsoke

their nettes, and folowed him.

19 And when he had gone a lytell
further thens, he sawe James the sonne
off Zebede, and Jhon, his brother, even
as they were in the shippe dressynge
their nettes.

20 And anon he called them ; and
they leeft their father, Zebede, in the
shippe with his heyred servauntes, and
went their waye after hym.

21 And they entred in to Capernaum,
and streight waye on the sabot dayes he
entred in to the sinagogge, and taught.

22 And they mervclled att hys Icarn-
inge ; for he taught them, as won whych
had power with him, and not as the
scrybes did.

23 And there was in the sinagogge a
man vexed with an vnclene spiritc, and
he cryed,

24 Sayingc, Lett me a lone, what have
we to do with the, Jesus of Nazareth 1
arte thou come to dcstroie vs?
I knowo
what tliou arte, tliou arte that holy man
promysed of God.

2.r; And JcHUH rebuked him, Rjiyugo,
Hooldc thy pace, and come out of ilio
man.

ir,0

GOTHIC, 360.

26 Yali tahida inrt nlinia wi uii1

yah hropyaiuls 8til»nai iiiikilai, u ... .wi
us iinma.

27 Yah afslitujincxledun

nllai,

Bilda-

lcikyan«lai)fl, bwaci sokideduu iiu|>
misso, cji|»aiulans, Wha siyai |>ata ? who
80 hiiseino so niuyo ? ei mi|> wahhifiiya
unhrninyam anabiud-
yali ahm;ii
i|», yah nil

<l iinnia.

fiis

'

'

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
26 And sc unclacna '^'''
and mycclrc stcfnc chi-.., ... ,
code.

[St. Makk

'•,

-f

27 Da wundrcdon bi •
bet>*'ux him cwacdon,
(lis I
itat he on
hwn?t is
anwealdc uncla*num gastum bcbyt, and
Iii hyrsumia|) him.

dtHis niwe lar ?

':et hi

i... ..

,^

^

28 Usidilya |>nn mrri}'a is suns and

28 And Bona fcrdc his hlisa to Galilea

nllaiis lii->it;in»ls (luK'ilaias."

rice.

2() Vail suns us )'izai swnnirncfon ufl-
ga^'«j^indans qcmun in parda iScinmnis
m\\> lakobau yah lo-
yah Andraiins,
hannen.

30 \\> swailiro Scimonis lajj in brinnon ;

yah suns (icjmn imnm bi iya.

29 ITraHilicc of h\Ta p«
comon on Simonis and .
mid lacobe and lohanne.

hi

30 S6|>lice da siet Simonis swcgcr
hri|iigendc ; and hi him be byre saidun.

31 Yah duat^ncjcjands, urraisida

|>o,
und^reipands handii izos yah aihulut
|>o so brinno suns, yah andbahtida ini.

31 And genmV- • V, he b* "•
byre handa geu'
fefcr hi forlet, and heo J)enodc him.

• and In

'^ nf,

sc

32 An(hinahtya )>an waur|)aiiainma, |>an
gasaggq sauil, boruu du i'nmia alhms
ha])andans, yah unhul|>oii8
ubil
)>ans
habandans.

33 Yah so baurgs alia garunnana was

fit daura.

34 Yah gahailida manatjans ubil hab-
nndans niissaleikaini sauiitim, yah un-
bullions manages uswarp, yah ni fralailot
rodyan |>os
unhuI[>on!4, unte kun|>iHiun
iuo.

35 Yah air uhtwon u.<istandand8, usTd-
ilyn, yah galai)) ana au)tyana st4k|>, yah
yainar ba)>.

36 Yah galai.stiins wnurjiun ininia Sci-

mon, yah )tai mi)) imma.
37 Yah bi-^itandans ina, qc km du im-
nia, patci allai |ink sukyand.

32 S6|>licc da hit wips »fcn gcwordon,
da sunno to setle eodc, hi broliton to
him eallc da unhalan, and da de wode
wwron.

33 And call seo burh-Ti-aru w«f ge-
gadero<l to daTC dunm.

34 And he man*-" '"^n^•lde do mis-
wwron, and
seidicum adlum l
manega (leofol-seocnyewa
he
ul-adnif,
and hi spreoan nc let, fordam hi wiston
da^t he Crist wnps.

35 And swidc «r arisende, lie fcrdc on

weste slowe, and hinc dur gebanl.

36 And him fyligdc Simon, and da do

mid him wa'ron.

37 And da hi bine gemetton, bj scdon
him, Mall dis folc dc bcc)i.

38 Yah qa|> <ln Im, Oaggnm «lu j^aim
bisunyane haimom yah iNiurgim, ci yal»
yainar mcr}'au, untc du)>c qam.

38 Da cwa^|> he, Fare we on gchonde
tunas ami ceastra, dn^t ic dar boilige,
wito<llicc to dam ic com.

39 Yah was mcn-ands in swnagogim
I7.0. and alia (ialoilaian, yah unliulJHms
uswair]>aml!».

40 ^'ah qam at imma finitiinil haband.4,
biilyauds ina, yah kniwam knussyands,

39 Antl he wflcs bo<ligcndc on hcora
geaanmungum, and eaire Galilea, and

<

(le.
11 hreofla, bine
biddendc, and gcblgedum cneowum, him

neivsa ut
. him c

I. 26-40.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

167

26 And the vnclene goost debrekynge
hym, and cryinge with grete vois, wente
awey fro hym.

27 And alle men wondriden, so that
thei sou5ten togidre amonge hem, sey-
inge, What is this thinge 1 what is this
newe techyng? for in power he com-
aundith to vnclene spiritis, and thei
obeyen to hym.

28 And the tale^ of hym wente forth

anoon in to al the cuntree of Galilee.

29 And anoon thei goynge out of the
synagoge camen in to the hous of Sy-
mont and Andrew, with James and
Joon.

30 Sothely and the modir of Symontis
wif sik in feueris restide ;^ and anoon
thei seien to hym of hir.

31 And he cummynge to, reride hir
vp, the hond of hir taken, and anoon
the feuere left hire, and she mynystride
to hem.

32

Forsothe

the

maad,
whcnne the
thei
brou^ten to hym alle hauynge yuel,
and hauynge deuelis.

sone wente doun,

euenynge

33 And al the cite was gaderid at the

5ate.
34 And he helide many that weren
soris, and he
traucilide with
castide out many deuelis, and he suffride
hem nat for to speke, for thei knewen
hym.

dyuers

35 And in the morewynge ful erly he
rysynge, gon out, wente in to desert
place, and preiede there.

36 And Symont suede hym, and thei

that weren witli hym.

37 And whanne thei haddcn founden
hym, thei seiden to hym, For alle men
Bccken thee.

38 And lie scith to licm, Go we in to
the ncxtc townes and citccs, that and
this thing I
there I preche, for to
came.

39 And he was prcchyngc in the syna-
gogis of hem, an<l in uUe (iulilec, and
castynf^o out fendin.

40 And a leprous man cam to hym,
bisccliyngc hym, and, the kiiec foldcn,

26 And the vnclene spirite tare him,
cryed out with a lowde voyce, and cam
out of him.

27 And they were all amased, in so
moche that they demaunded won off
another a monge them selves, saying.
What thinge ys thys 1 what newe doc-
trine is thys 1 for he commaundeth the
spirites with power, and they
foule
obeye him.

28 Anon his name spreed abroade
throughoute all the region borderynge
on Galile.

29 And immediatly as sonne as they
were come out of the sinagogge they
entred in to the housse of Symon and
Andrew, with James and Jhon.

30 Symones motherelawe lay sicke of
a fiver ; and annon they told hym of
her.

31 And he cam, and toke her by the
honde, and lifte her vppe, and the fiver
forsoke her by and by, and she ministred
vnto them.

32 And at even, when the sun was
doune, they brought vnto him all that
were diseased, and them that were pos-
sessed with devyls.

33 And all the cite gaddred togedder

at the dore.

34 And he healed many that were
sycke of dyvers deseases, and he cast
out many devyls, and suffered not the
devyk to speake, because they knewc
him.

35 And in the moorninge very erly
Jesus arose, and went out in to a solitary
place, and there prayed.

36 And Simon and they that were

with hym folowed after hym.
37 And when they had founde him,
they sayde vnto him. All men seke for
the.

38 And he sayd vnto them. Let vs go
in to the next tonnes, that Y mayc
preache there also, for truly I cam out
for that ])urpoHC.
39 And ho i»reachcd in their sina-
goggos, throughout all Galile, and cast
devyls out.

40 And there cam a leper to him, bc-
scchinge him, and knclc*! doune vnto

ir>8

OOTIIIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

;

yah <|i|nin<lfl du inima |>ntei, Viil)ai wiluis,
unx'f^t luik ^uhruinyaij.

41

tp

lc8U8, infcinaiuls,

liaiiclu Rcina, attait<»k
inmia, Wilyau, wair|> lirains.

ufrakyaiuls
iiiiina, yuh qa|>

42 Yali l)i[>c qa|> |>ata Icsus, suns |)ata
Jjrutsfill aflai[) af iniiiia, yah hrains war}'.

to cwm)\ Drihtcn, gif du wj'lt, dii miht
gccla*usian mc.

41 S6|)lice se Hwlend him mHtAode,
and his hand a[>€no<lc, and hinc o't-lirin-
cndc, and dus cwa*)>, Ic wyllc, bco dii
geclsdnscKl.

42 And du he dus cw{p|>. Bona sco
r..,..,. ijji^ fram gewat, and he whm

].T-:

43 Yali gawhotyands Tmma, suns us-

43 And suna he bead him,

saiulida ina,

44 Yali ini\> (lu imma, Saiwh, ci mann-
liun ni qi|>ai8 waiht ; ak gat^)^, jiuk silhan
ntaiiLryaii giidyin, yah at hair fniiii ga-
|^atci uuahau}) MoseSi
hraiiu'inai |>cinai
du weitwo(.li|)ai im.

44 And cwa*|), Wama, diet dii liit nan-
um men ne secge ; ac ga, and alyw dc
dam siicerda ealdre, and brin;; for dinre
cla?nsunga diet Moyscs behead, him on
gewitnessc.

45 i|)

IS, usL^aggands, dugann ineryan
filu, yah u.s»ii[)an {rata wjiurd, swaswc is
niahta aiuhuigyo in baurg
yu|>aii
gak>i{)an, ak uta ana uu|>yaini
studiui
>vaij ; yah iddyeduu du imiuu alIu|)ro.

ni

Chap. IT.

Yali galai)> aftm in
Kafarnauni, afar dagans. Yah gafrchun,
J»atei Tn garda int,

i

2 Yah 8uns ga<{(Mnun nianagai, swaswe
daura.

ni ganiostoihin, uih

at

^-ujjan
Yah rodida im waurd.

4?; And he,

d:i utgangende, ongan
b(Klian, and widmsersian da spneee, swa
da't he ne mihte openliee on da eoa'*ti*o
gan, ac bct»n ute on wcstum stuwum ;
and hi a'<rhwanou to him comon.

Chap. II.

1 And efl after dagum,
he eodc into Cafarnaum. And hit VfOiS
gehyred, du't he wa'S on luiso,

2 Aiid main'ura toi/a'th if < .piumh,

.

.

heom ttpiiec.

And he to

3 Yah qcmun at inuna uslijian bair-

3 And hi comon ilnne laman to him

audans, hafanaua frani tidworiin,

bereude, done feowcr men ba*ron.

4 Yah ni niagandans nowlia qiman

Tinma faura

nianageim, ar "

'

'

'

lirot,

|)art'i was Icsus; yali

4 And da hi ne mihton hinc in-bring-
f^r da^re m.vnigeo. hi oi>enodon done
. clar so lla'lrnd wnM ; and

ans, in84iilidc(hin
lailutun, ana |>ammci lag sa uslijia.

)mtA

l>adi,

yali

fra-

hi da in-asendon

dxt bwi, df " ...:.u4 uu-la»g.

5 Ganaiwhands |>an Icflus ga)aul>cin ir.c,
llarnilu, aflct-

qaji (hi jmmnia U8)i|>in,
anda \>\is frawanrhtcis )>cinuti.

«; Sojilicc da 8C Ilselend gcscah hcora
.he cwa?|» to dam laman, Sunu,

i.v

.._. ..I dine synna forgifenc.

6 Wesunid) |'an
yainar Hitnntlans.
in haiiiuni Hoinaiin.

Hiiniai

|>ii5e bokan'c
yidi |>agkyauilaus sis

6 Dar wjrron sumo of dam IxVerum
sittende, and on heofa heortan |>encende,

\N ha Mi Hwa nHlcil" naitciuinst Whas

7

7 Ilwi s|»yc|> des dust He dysegn|>

1.41.-11.7-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

169

seide, ^ii thou wolt, thou maist dense
me.

41 Forsothe Jhesus, hauynge mercy
on hym, strei3t out his hond, and, touch-
ynge hym, seith to hym, I wole, be thou
maad clene.

42 And whanne he hadde seide, anoon
the lepre partide awey fro hym, and he
is clensid.

43 And he thretenyde to hym, and
anoon he putte hym out,

44 And seith to hym, Se thou, seie to
no man ; but go, shewe thee to the
princis of prestis, and offre for thi clens-
ynge tho thingis that Moyses badde, in
to Nvitnessynge to hem.

45 And he, gon out, biganne to preche,
and diffame^ the word, so that nowe he
mi3te nat opynly go in to the citee, but
be with out forth in deserte placis ; and
thei camen to gidre to hym on alle
sydis.

him, and sayde vnto him, Yf thou wylt,
thou arte able to make me clene.

41 Jesus had compassion on him, and
put forth his honde, touched him, and
sayde vnto him, I will, be clene.

42 And as sone as he had spoken,
immediatly the leprosy departed from
him, and he was clensed.
43 And he charged hym, and sent him
awaye forthwith,

44 And sayd vnto him, Se that thou
tell no man ; but gett the hence, and
shewe thy sylfe to the preste, and oflPer
for thy clensynge those thinges which
Moses commaunded, for a testimonial!
vnto them.

45 But he, as sone as he was departed,
began to tell many thinges, and to pub-
lyshe the dede, in so moche that Jesus
coulde no more openly entre in to the
cite, but was out in desert places ; and
they cam to him from every quarter.

Chap. II.

i And eft he entride in
And

to Capliarnaum, after ei3te days.
it is herd, that he was in an hous,

2 And many camen togidre, so that
it tok nat, nether at the 3ate. And he
Bj^ac to hem a word.

3 And there camen to hym men bryng-
ynge a man sike in palesie, the whichc
"was borun of foure.

4 And whanne thei mi3te nat offre hym
to hym for the campanye of peple, tliei
madcn the roof nakid, wher he was ;
and makynge opyn, thei scnten doun tlic
bed<l, in whiche the sike man in palasie
lay.

5 Sothely whanne Jhcsus say the fcith
of hem, he seith vnto the sike man in
pala.sic, Sonc, thi synnes ben for3oucn
to thee.

6 Forsothe there wercn summc of tlic
Bcribis sittyngc, and tlicnkyngc; in li«;r
bertis,

Chap. II.

i After a feawe dayes, he
entred into Capernaum againe. And it
was noysed, that he was in a housse,

2 And anon many gaddered togedder,
in so moche that nowe there was no
roume to receave them, no nott in places
about the dore. And he preached vnto
them.

3 And there cam vnto hym, that
brought wone sicke off the palsey, borne
off fower men.
4 And be cause they coulde not com
nye vnto hym for prcacc, they opened
the rofe of the housse, where he was ;
and when they had broken yt open, they
Ictt doune the bccd, where in the sicke
of the palsey ley.

5 When Jcsua sawc their fayth, he
sayde to the sicke of tho palsey, Sonne,
thy synnes are forgevcn the.

6 There were ccrtcyne of the scrybcs

sittingc, and reasoninge in thcMr hcrtcs,

7 What spckith be thus?

lie blas-

7 lIoNvc docth thys felowe blaspheme?

2
1

170

6
1

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mauk

nia'4

aflctun

frftwaurlitin-*,

niba

nins

Ciu|>?

« Yah suns ufkiuinainlH losus ahinin
sciimmnm, |>atti swa j>ai inlto(K«lun hIh,
qa|) (lu iin, Uuwhc inito|' |mU m liairt-
am Tzwaraim ?

9 Wha|>ar jst azcti/o dii (|i|mn |>amma
u.sli|Mn, AfU'tanda l^iis frawaurhteis |)ein<>8,
|>uu (jijian, Urrcis, yah iiiin jmUi ])a(li
|>eiiiata. yah paj?g 1

10 A|»}jau

wahhifni
hahai{> sunus mans ana air|»ai aflctan
frawaurhtins, qaj) ilu }>amnia usli|nn,

\vitci}>

|»atei

ei

hwa nueg B}'nna forgyfan, buton God
una 1

8 {)a 8C Htrlend diet on his gasto
him |>«ht-
^ ace ge daa

oncncow, dnet hi swa 1
<>n, he cwa-j) to him, li
I'ing on cowrum heortum ?

'

9 Ilwa'tlcr is cdrc to seogonnc to «1am
laman, Dc gynd dine synna forgifone,
h wader dc cwedan, Aris, nim din bed,
and ga ?

10 Da?t go 8o[>lice witon da?t mannes
sunn hajf|) anweahl on e<>r|mn synna to
forg}fttnne, he cwa)) to dam laman,

1

]his qi|'a, urrcis, nimuh j^ata badi

1

De ic secge, aris, nim din l>ed, and

JHjin, yah ga^'g du gartla }jcinaninia.

gd to dinum Iiiisc.

1

Yali urrais suns, yah, ushafyands
Imdi, usiddya faura andwair|>ya allaizc,
Kwaswe us;»«'isiiododun allai yah liauh-
i(K'(hin, inikilyandans (jru)>, qi))andans,
patei aiw swa ni gascwljun.

13 Yali galai|> aftra faur niarcin, yah
nil nianagcins Tddyi/dun ihi Vninia ; yah
lais'uhi Tns.

12 And he sona aras, and, [undcrlcat
bore,] beforan him eallum code, swa
diet ealle wundredon

.

.

.

and dus cwjcdon, Niefrc we scr

dyllic no gosawon.

13 Kft he lit-ei^le to dwre s.t. and call
seo ma^nigeo him to eom ; and he hi
laSrde.

14

\m\m Alfaiaiis sitanihin

Yal» wharl)onds, f,'asaw]i Laiwwi
at niotai, yali
Yah

(hi imma, Oa^g afar

mis.

(|a|>

usstJindands "iddya afar "nnina.

15 Yah warj', hij>o is anakiim])ida in
ganhi Ts,
yali inanagai motaryos yah
Icsua
frawanrlitai
yah siponyani is ; wcsim auk managai
yah iddyeihiii afar iinina.

ini)>anakiin)1iid<>diin

16 Yah |>ai hokaryos yah Farcisaiels
gaHaiwhaiuhins ina niatyandan inil> [niini
iiiotaryain yah frawaurhtaini, qi>)iun du
|>aiin siponyam is, Wha ist
nii|i
inotarvani yali frawaurhtaiin niatyi|i yah
drigi;ki|) ?

j»atoi

17 Yah Ljal

Ni |murl»un
ihiha hahandans ;
waurlitans, ak frawaurlitans.

,

Is Tosn«», qa|» «hi ini,
.; k'keis, ak |iai uh-
ni qam Iu[h)u
us-

lie

14 And dii

for|>-e<><lo, he geseah
Lenin Alphei sittonde a't hys ccp-sctle,
Da
an«l he ewa»|> to him, Folga mc.
iiras ho and folgo<le him.

15 And hit gewear|>, da he stoi on his
hiise, da't manega manfulle .
. sirton
ini«l dam lIachMnlo and his looming-
bo['lice nmuega, da de him
cnihtum ;
fyligdon, wscron

.

1

Boceras and Farisei, and owa'ilon,
AVitodlioe ho ytt mid maiifullum ami
synfuUum. an«l hi ewanhm to his loom-
ing cnihtum. Hwi ytt eowor larrow and
drine)) mid nuinfuUum and synfulhim ?

17 Da so TIa'lond
him. No bol'urfon i
da dc untnimc synt ; ne com ic na da>t
ic cI^ikkIc rihtwise, ac synfullc.

18 Yah wcsun Fiponyos Yohannis yah
; yah atTiMyodun,
Farcisaifis fast-andans
yah qo)mn du iuinia, l)uwho Hi|Mtuyoa
ti>lianncs yali Farrisairis fastaud, l|» \mi
)>viiiai aipouyos 11 i fiusUiuI ?

18 And dfi wapron lohannes leoming-
cnihtas and riiarisoi fa?stcndo ; and »li
c«»mon hi, and swdon him, Hwi fa\Kta|)
lolmnnes lenniing-ciiihtas and I'haris*
curum, and dine nc fmta)) f

IL8-I8.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

femeth ; who may for3eue synnes, no
but God alone?

8 The whiche thing anoon knowen by
the Holy Goost, for thei thou5ten so
with inne hem self, Jhesus seith to hem,
What thenken ^ee these thingis in ^om^e
hertis ?

9 What is li5tere for to seie to the sike
man in palasie, Synnes ben for5ouen to
thee, or for to seie, Ryse, take thi bed,
and walke 1

TO Sothely that 586 wite that mannes
sone hath powere in erthe to for5eue
synnes, he seith to the sike man in
palasie,

11 I seie to thee, ryse vp, take thi

bed, and go in to thin hous.

12 And anoon he roos vp, and, the
bed taken vp, he wente bifore alle men,
so that alle men wondriden, and houour-
iden God, seyinge. For we sayen neuer
so.

13 And he wente out eftsone to the
see, and al the cumpanye oi peple cam
to hym ; and he tau3te hem.

14 And whenne he passide, he say
Leui Alfey sittynge at the tolbothe, and
he seith to hym. Sue thou me. And he
rysynge suede hym.

15 And it is don, whenne he sat at
the mete in his hous, many puplicanys
and synful men saten togidre at the
mete with Jhesu and his
discipHs ;
sothely there weren manye that folevv-
eden hym.
- 16 And scribis and Pharisees seeyinge,
for he eet with puplicanys and synful
men, seiden to his discijilis. Win ^oure
maister ctith and drinkith with pupli-
canys and synners ]

TYNDALE, 1526.

171

forgeve

synnes, but God

Who can
only 1

8 And iramediatly when Jesus per-
ceaved in his sprete, that they so rea-
soned in them selves, he sayde vnto
them. Why thynke ye soche thinges in
youre hertes 1

9 Whether ys it easyer to saye to the
sicke of the palsey. Thy synnes ar for-
geven the, or to saye, Aryse, take vppe
thy beed, and walke 1

TO That ye maye knowe that the sonne
of man hath power in erth to forgeve
sinnes, he spake vnto the sicke of the
palsey,

III saye vnto the, aryse, and take vp
thy beed, and get the hens in to thyne
awne housse.

12 And by and by he arose, toke vp
hys beed, and went forth before them
all, in so moche that they were all
amased, and glorified God, sayinge. We
never sawe it on thys fassion.

13 And he went out agayne vnto the
see, and all the people resorted vnto
hym ; and he taught them.

14 And as Jesus passed by, he sawe
Levy the sonne of Alphey sytt att the re-
ceyte of custome, and sayde vnto him,Fol-
owe me. And he arose and folowed hym.
15 And yt cam to passe, as Jesus sate
att meate in his housse, many pubpli-
cans and synners sate att meate also
with Jesus and his disciples ; for there
were many that folowed him.

16 And when the scribs and Pharises
sawe him eate with publicans and syn-
ners, they sayde vnto his disciples, Howe
is it that he eateth and dryuketh with
publicans and synners ?

17 This thing herd, Jhesus seith to
hem, IIoolc men han no nedc to a Icchc,
but thei that han yuelc ; forsothc I cam
not for to clepe iaste men, but synners.

18 And disciplis of Joon and the Plia-
risccs wcrcn fastyngc ; nnrl thei camen,
and scion to liym, Wlii disciplis of Joon
and of Piiarisccs fasten, but thi disciplis
fasten nat 1

17 When Jesus had hcrdc that, he
sayd vnto them, The whole have no ncdc
of the visicion, but the sicke ; I cam to
CJil the sinners to rcpentaunce, and not
the iuste.

18 And the disciples of Jhon and of
the Pharises did faste ; and they cam,
and sayde vnto him, Why do the dis-
cij>lcH of Jhon and off the Pharises faste,
juid thy disciples fast nott ?

172

GOTHIC, 36o.

19 Yah (|Ji)i

iin

lesus,

ll>ai niftinm

Hunyus i*ni|>fa(lis, und |mtoi ini|>
Jiii int
]»ni|»fa|iH, ftiHtan ? Swa lai;;;^Mi wlicila swc
inagun

hIb haband l)ru|)ra<.l,

iiiij)

iii

fasUiii.

20 A|)|>aii

atgaiijffftnd dagos, j^an

af-
niinada af iiii sa l)ru}>fa)>s, yah |mu fast-
aiid in yainaiimia daga.

31 Ni manna plat fanlns niuyis 8iuyi|>
ana Hna;;iin fiiiniyaiia, il>ai afniinai fullon
af |uiitnna sa niuya |>aiiiina fairiiyin, yah
wairsiza gataura wair}iij>.

il)ai aufto

22 Ni manna giutij» wcin yuLTu'^^ta in
bal;;ins fairnyans,
distairai
wein \>i\i& niuyo j^ans bal^^dns. yah wein
usL,iitni|>, yah }>ai balgcis fracji.stnand.
Ak wein yuggata in balgins niuyans
giiitand.

23 Yah warJT, j^airhgaggan Tmma sab-
atisk, yah dugiinnim
bato daga |iairh
Bi]>onyos is skewyaudans, raupyau ahi>u.

[St. Mauk

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
19 Da cwae)> so Ha?lend, Cwrde gc
sceolon dses Virydguman cnihtaii f;«-stan,
swa langc swa sc brydgimia mid him is ?
Nc miigon hi fa>stan, swa
do swa
hi done brydgumnn mid I

;.a}>.

20 S6|)Iico (1a dagas cuina|«, dunnc sc
brydguma him bi|» fram aoyrred, and
dunnc hi fa>8ta|> on dam dagiiin.

31 Nan man nc siwa)> niwnc scyp to
caldum reafc, dies he afyr}^ done niwan
soyp of dam caldan reafe. and \>i\^ mare
slite.

22 And nan man ne de[) niwc win on
ealde bytta, elles dut win tobryc|» du
bytta, and diet Mnn bi|> iigotcn, and da
bytta forwurdaji. Ac niwc win sceal be<>n
gedon on niwc bytta, donuc beo|> butu
gehealden.

23 Eft wa?s gcworden, da he rcstc-
daijum l^urh H»ceras eo<le, his leoniing-
cnihtas ongunnon da cur pluccigean.

24 Yah Faroisaieis qcj»im

(hi imma,
Sai ! wha tauyand si|>onyos )>einai sab-
batim, \*n{c\ ni hknld ist.

2.^ Yah is <jaj> du im, Niu ussuggwu|>
aiw wha pitnwida Daweid, |>an |)aurfta,
yah grcdags was is, yah j)ai mi|> imma ?

24 Da cwsedon Pharisoi to him, Loca
nu ! hwiet dine leorning-cnihtas (\6\tf
diet him alyfed na?8 on rest<

25 Da sa'de he h>Tn, Nc i.i

go

na'frc hwwt dydc Dauid,

.

.

da hinc hingrode, and da do

mid him wa'ron ?

26 Whaiwa galai|»

in gnrd Gujjs, uf
Abia|>ara, gndyin, yah
hlaibans faur-
ni Kkuld ist
lagcinain matida, )Minzc'i
niatyan, niba ainaiin gudyam, yah gaf
yah JMiim mi|> sis wisaiidam.

26 Hii he in Go<les huse eoilc, imder
Abiathar, dara sacenla ealdrc, and he a>t
' ifas, de him ne alyftdc
da ofTn;
n\ biiton sacerdum linum,
na*ron i
and he sealdc dam do mid him wa^ron.

'

27 Yah (ia)i im, iS^dtbato in mans war|>

gnnkapanH, ni manna In sabbato dagis ;

28 Swaci fnuiya ist sa sunus nuuis yali

|mmma sabbato.

III.

C'llAP.

I Yah gnlai|> nftra in
wnai:<)i;i>n, yah wax yainar manna pi-
^nrmina hidtniidH Imndu.

2 Yah wItaidiMhin imma, hailidediu sab*

[mio diiga, i'i wrohidedcina Tna.

27 And he soedc him. Rerte-djeg wirs
gcworht for dam men, uies se man for
dam n-'
28 W.:

drihton is mauncs sunu

••

;

eac swylcc rcstc-da'ges.

CiiAP. III.

1 And oft he eo<le on
gesommiiigo, an<l dar wa^s lin man for-
soninoone hantl hwhljondc.

"

3 And '
dagum ^.

'

'

>

;

!, r lie on n sto
ue gcwregilon.

1

IT. 1 9.-111. 2.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

173

19 And Jhesus seith to hem, Whether
the sonnys of weddyngis mown faste, as
long as the spouse is with hem ? Hou
longe tyme thei han the spouse with
hem, thei mowe nat faste.

20 Forsothe dayes shulen come, whenne
the spouse shal be taken awey from
hem, and thanne thei shulen faste in
thoo days.

21 No man seweth a pacche of rude^
clothe to an old clothe, ellis he takith
awey the newe supplement,^ and a more
brekynge is maad.

22 And no man sendith newe wyn in
to oold botelis,^ ellis the wyn shal berste
the wyn vesselis, and the wyn shal be
held out, and the wyne vesselis shulen
But newe wyn shal be sent in
perishe.
to newe wyn vesselis.

23 And it is don eftsoone, whanne the
Lord walkide in the sabothis by the
comes, and his disciplis bigunnyn to
passe forth, and plucke eris.

24 Sothly the Pharysees seiden, Leo!
what don thi disciplis in sabotis, that is
nat leeueful.

25 And he seith to hem, Radde ^ee
neuere what Dauyth dide, whanne he
hadde neede, and he hungride, and thei
that weren with hym 1

26 Hou he wente in into the hous of
God, vndir Abiathar, prince of prestis,
and ectc loouys of proposicioun, the
whiche it was nat leeful to etc, no but
to prestis alone, and he 5aue to hem
til at weren with hym.

27 And he seide to hem, The sabote is
maad for man, and nat a man for the
BHl)ote

;

28 And so mannys sone is lord also

of the sabotli.

19 And Jesus sayde vnto tlrem, Can
the chyldren of a weddinge faste, whils
the brydgrome is with them 1 As longe
as they have the brydgrome with them,
they cannot faste.

20 Butt the dayes wyll come, when the
bryde grome shalbe taken from them,
and then shall they faste
in tlioose
dayes.

2

Also no man soweth a pece of nejve
cloth vnto an olde garment, for then
taketh he awaye the newe pece from the
olde, and so is the rent worsse.

22 In lyke wyse no man poureth newe
wyne in to olde vesseHes, for yf he do
the newe wyne breaketh the vesselles,
and the wyne runneth out, and the
Butt newe wyne
vessels are marde.
must be poured in to newe vesselles.

23 And it chaunsed, that he went
thorowe the corne feldes on the sabboth
daye, and his disciples as they went on
their waye, began to plucke the eares
of corne.

24 And the Pharises sayde vnto him.
Take hede ! why do they on the sabboth
daye, that which is vnlaufull.

25 And he sayde vnto them, Have ye
never redde what David did, when he
had nede, and was anhongrcd, bothe he
and they that were with him 1

26 Howe they went into the housse of
God, in the dayes of Abiathar, the hye
preste, and ate the halowed loves, which
is not laufull, but for the prestes only,
to eate, and gave also to them which
were with him.

27 And he sayde to them. The saboth
daye was made for man, and nott man
for the saboth daye ;

28 Wherfore is the sonne of man lorde

even of the saboth daye.

Chap. IIL

i And ho cntridc cft-
soone in to tlic synagoge, and ther was
a man hauyngc a dryc bond.

2 And thoi aHi)icdon hym, ^if he helidc

in sabothis, for to accuse hym.

CiiAP. in.

I And lie cntrcd agayno
into tlic synagog, and there was a man
whicli liad a wid(b-cd liondc.

2 And they watched liim, to so yf ho
wohle heulo him on the saboth daye,
that they myght accuse hym.

;

1

174

CJOTIllC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

3 Yah (iii)>

till

^'ii|uursnim haliuiuliii

|»ainmft iiinnn j^onima
liaiulii, Uncis In

iiiiduiiiai.

4 Yah cjaj) ilii

iin, Skul<lii ist in 8ab-
batini )>in|) taiiyaii, aij'lau uii|'iu|> tauyani
Buiwuhi na.syun, ai|)[>uu us(^i»tyan 1

1(>

cis jahaith'thin.

5 Yah ussjiiwhands

mcnla,
pmrs in tlaul)iJK)S hairtins ize, qa|) du
biynina mann, Ufrakci |h) handn | cina.
so
S'ali

ufiakida, yah

gasto}'

aftra

ins

m\\>

liandus is.

3 !)ii ovrr|) he to flam men '
A'ris ^

ha-fdr,

scrunccnc hand
him.

*"

-

j

4 f)a cwa'|> he, A'lyf)) n-'t.- d r/nm wcl
to donne, hwa'tliT de yf«lr (
^:!\\l;i ge-
hielan, hwaxler dc furspillan 1 And hi
siiwodon.

5 And hi besoeawigende mid yrre, ofcr
byra Iicortan blindnesse gc-unret, cwa*)>
to (1am men, A|>enc dine hand. Aud
he til^enedc hi, da wear|> his baud gc-
baeled sona.

6 Yah f^njxjxJ^ndnns )mn Fnrcisaicis suns-
aiw, nii|) |>aini llcrodianuni, gaiuni ga-
tawidcdun bi iua, ci iuima usqcmciua.

6 Dii Pharisei mid Ilerodianiscum iit-
gangende, |)eahte<loa ongOu bine, hii bi
blue forduu mibton.

7 Yali leans aflai|> m\\> siponyani scin-
aim du niarcin ; yah filu nianagcins us
(Salc'ihiia hiistldeduu afar imuia yah us
luihiia,

8 Yah us Xainisaulwnnm, yah us 1-
(hnt)aia, yah hindana launhmaus, yah
I'ai l»i Twra yah Soid«»na, nianageins fihi,
galiaiisyandans whau iilu
tawida,
qeinun at ininia.

ia

7 And da ferde so TItelend to d.iTe src
mid his Iconiing-cuihtum ; and mycel
nunigco him fyligde fram GaUlca and
ludai,

8 And Hierusalcm, and fram Iduinea,^
and bt'gcon«lan lordane, and to him ctmi
myci-1 nuncu'eo yml>c Tinim ami iSidonc,
gchyrcudc da j)ing dc be worbtc

9 Yjdi qft|> j>aim siponyam seinaim, ci
|)izos

lialiai|) wesi at imma, in

skip
ntanagcins, ei ni ))i*aiht'ina ina

10 Managans auk pihailida, swaswe
dnisun ana ina,
oi innna attaitokeina.
"^'ah 8wa nianagai swe habaidcduu wund-
ufnyoH,

I I Yah alnnans unlmiinyanH, {uiih )>an
ina «^':t.s(>w)iun, (hnisnn dn inuna, yah
hropidcthni, (p})andans, patii }>u is nuu-
us C»u|»s.

I 2 ^'ah f\\\\ nndbait ins, ei iini ni ga-

Bwikun)>id(*d(*ina.

13 Yah ustai^ in fairguni, yah athai-
bait )>auzci wihla is ; yah gali|>uu du
ininia.

14 Yah gawaurlitAt twabf du wiMin mi|»

Bis, yah ci insandidcdi ins mcryau.

15 Yali haban wablufni du hailyan

Bauhtins, yali uswairpan unhuI)K:)U8.

9 And he cw«»|> to bis cnibtum, da't bi
liim on 8ci|>c ^'nodon, for dare mcu-
igum, dKt bi bine nc uf|'rungon ;

10 S6)>licc manega be gebselde.

hi a't-brinon bis.
trumncssa,

' i.i t
^Vud swa fcia buu uu-

h\\ i

1

Ami uncla'nc gastas bn^ftlon. da bi
bine gi*ftawon, bi tofi'r"- ^''"i a>«tr(liton,
and dus eweilende, ».
;», Uii cart
Goilcs 8unu.

12 Ami I
bine ne g«

'

vdc forbcad, dwt bi

13 And on anne miint be ferde, and to
'•> da dc be wulde ; and bi

IiIt'

to 1

:

i.

14 And he dydo, dwt bi twelfo mid
him wa'ron, and be bi dscndc godspell
to boiligennc.

15 And be him aowcabl sealde un-
tnimneasa to ba'lannc, and dcofobscoc-
nesHA lit to adr'^

•

16 Yali gasatida Sciiuona uamo Fai-

16 And be la

iinoQ Pctmrn,

trus,

111.3-16.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

175

1

3 And he seitli to the man hauynge a

diye hond, Kyse in to the mydil.

4 And he seith to hem, Is it leeueful
to do wel in the sabothis, or yuele 1 for
to make a soule saaf, whether to lese 1
And thei weren stille.

5 And he biholdynge hem aboute with
wrathe, hauynge sorwe vpon the blynd-
nesse of her herte, seith to the man,
Holde forth thin honde. And he helde
forth, and the honde is restorid to hym.

6 Sothely Pharisees goynge out anoon,
maden a counseil with Herodyans a3eins
hym, hou thei shulden lese hym.

7 Forsothe Jhesus with his disciplis
wente to the see ; and myche cumpanye
from Galilee and Judee suede hym,

8 And fro Jerusalem, and fro Ydume,
and bi3endis Jordan, and thei that aboute
Tyre and Sydon, a grete multitude, heer-
ynge the thingis that he dide, camen to
hym.

9 And Jhesus seith to his disciplis,
that the litil boot shulde serue hym, for
the cumpanye of peple, lest thei oppres-
siden hym ;

10 Sothely he helide many, so that
thei felden fast to hym, that thei shulden
Forsothe hou many euere
touche hym.
hadden soris,'''

11 And vnclene spiritis, whenne thei
seien hym, felden down to hym, and
crieden, seyinge, Thou art the sone of
God.

12 And gretely he manasside hem, that

thei shulden nat make hym opyn.^

13 And he styinge in to an hil, clcpide
to hym whom he wolde ; and thei camen
to hym.

14 And he made, that tliere weren
twclue witli liyin, and tliat he shulde
sende hem for to j>reche.

15 And he ^auc to hem power of hcel-
out

ynge sikncssiH, and of castynge
fendis.

16 And to Symount he puttc name

3 And he saide vnto tlie man whych
had the widdred honde, Aryse and
stonde in the middes.

4 And he sayd to them. Whether ys it
laufull to do a good dede on the saboth
daye, or an evyll 1 to save a mannes life,
or to kyll ? Butt they helde their peace.
5 And he loked rounde aboute on them
angrely, mornynge on the blindnes of
their herttes, and sayd to the man,
And he
Stretch forth thyne honde.
stretched it forth, and the honde was
restored even as whole as the other.

6 The Pharises departed, and streyght
waye gaddred a counseil with them that
belonged to Herode agaynst hym, that
they myght destroye him.

7 And Jesus avoyded with his disciples
to the see ; and a greate multitude
folowed him from Galile and from
Jewry,

8 And from Hierusalem, and from
Idumea, and from beonde Jordane, and
they that dwelled about Tyre and Sidon,
a greate multitude, which when they
hade herde what thynges he did, cam
vnto him.

9 And he comaunded his disciples,
that a shippe shulde wayte on him, be-
cause off the people, leste they shulde
throunge hym ;

10 For he had healed many, in so
moche that they preased apon him, for
to touche him. As many as had plages,

1

And when the vnclene sprites sawe
him, they fell doune before him, and
crycd, sayingc. Thou arte the sonne of
God.

12 And he streyghtly charged them,

that they shulde not vtter him.

13 And he went vi)pe into a moun-
tayne, and called vnto him whom lie
wolde ; and they cam vnto hini,

14 And he ordeined the twelve, that
they shulde ])e with him, and that lie
myght sende them to preache.

15 And that they might have power
cast out

syknesses, and to

to lieale

devylles.

16 And he gave vnto Simon to uamo

Petre,

Peter,

I7<i

cn'llllC, 360.

17 Vail lakoliau )mintim Zaihaidaiaus
yah lohfiniie, brol^r ][akol)aiiH, yali ^aaat-
ida ini nainiia
8unyu8 |)eiwh(>nH ;

ISauanuir^ais, |>atci

ist,

iH Yfth Andraian yah Fillppu, yah
]>ar|>au]auinaiii yali Mat|>aiu, yali poman
yah lakoliu |miia Alfaiaiis, yah pivddaiu
yah Sciiiioiia }>aiia Kananoiten,

19 Yah luUan iHkarioten, saci yah
galewida ina. Yah atiddycdun in ^'ard,

;

AXOLO SAXON, 995.
17 And larobum Z«'l>c<lei and lohan-
nem, his brodor, and liim naman onscttc
Boanerges, da;t is, |>UDrefi beam ;

[St. Mark

18 And Andream and Philipjium, and
r>arthol()meum and Matheum, ami Thom-
am and lacobum Alpliei, and Ta^ldeum
and Simonem Chananeum,

19 And ludam Scarioth, se hinc sealdc.

20 Yah fjaiddya sik nianap^ci, swaswe

20 And efl him to com swa miccl men-

ni inaliteduii iiih

Iilaif inatyan.

igu, da't hi nefdon hluf to etanne.

2 T Yah hftusyandans fram imma bok-
nryos yah an] araii, usiddycduii fjahaban
Vila ; <|oj)Uii auk, patci usgaisi|)3 ist.

21 And da hi hinc gehynlon, hi frnbm
dnit lii hyne nam<»n ; and dus cwa?don,
Soplicc he is on hat-heortnessc gewciid.

22 Yah bokaryos |>ai af lainisaulwmai
IJaiail/.aihul

(|iinninhins,

<jt'|)iin,

J^atci

lial»ai|»,

\n\\

I'atoi

in

|>amTiia n-ikistin

iihIiu1{m)ii<) uswaiq>i|> )>aim unhul|>om.

23 Yah athaitands Ins Tii

'j

'

1,

qa|» du iin, Whaiwa mag »Satii:
anan uswairpan 1

: .1-

24 Yah yal)ai }>iudant^nli wi)»ra sik
^athiilyada, ni niai; standan so {'iudan-
garili yaina.

22 And da boccras de wendon frnm
Hicrusalcm, cwacdon. S(i|>licc ho ha»f)>
IJoolzobub. and on dei»fla caldro ho drofol-
Beocneesa ut-a^lnTj^.

23 And he hi t»»i;jn?<lcrc ijcolypodo. and
on bi;^pollum him to cwa'|>, Hii iii:ig
Satanas Satanan lit adnfan ?

24 Ami pf his rice on him sylfum by|»

todicled, hil ma^g hit standan ?

25 Yah yal>ai ptrds wi|)ra sik ijachnl-

25 And ffif d.vt hu8 ofor hit sylfe ys

yada, ni nia^ stanilan sa gards yaiiis.

to<la?lod, liii ma'g hit standan ?

26 Yah yalmi Satana ussto|> ana sik
eilban, yah pxhulifm warji, ni mag gast-
an(hin. ak audi hal>ai{).

26 And ^'if Satanas win}? ongen hinc
sylfne, he bi|> to<liole<l, and he standan
no mn^tr, ac h.Tf|» ondo.

27 Ni manna ma;jj ktvsa 8win|'ifl, pilci|>-
nndg in ^rd is, wilwan, niba faur)>i8
j^al)indi)», yah |>an jmna

swiii)>an

l^iiia

Ijaitl

V-i

di^\Vll\vaI.

2.S Amrii t\\\H\ i/wiH, I'atoi allatn aHot-
uda {mtJi frawanrlitc sunum mannr. yah
naitcMnoH, swa numagos swaswe wayam-
cryand.

2<)

A|»|>an

Wft>*amrrri}i Ahman
Wrihitna, ni hal>ai)> fndet aiw, ak hkula
Ist aiwi'inair.os frawaurhUuM.-

wini

27 No m:i»g mail done stranqTin his
iihta and his fatu l>ercafian, and on his
hii.H gan, bi'
»<trani;T»n icrest
gebiude, ai

»;< rcatiiro.

'

28 So|>lioc io <

< ,ill(» sinna
syml manna branuim f«'r;:yli n»\ and
byHmerunga, dam dc hi bysmerHi)i.

'vv <ii-.;r, .!:» t

20 ^

•1.1

' ic cow sccgo, so done Hal-
v«mora|». sc na»f|> on ocnyssc

for.. \

in .•<>»•

ao bi|» eces gyltea scyldig.

30 Untc qr|'un, Ahman unhndnyana

30 Fordam dc hi cwjcdon, He hacfji

habaitv

unclaMinc giist

31 Yah firTnun |»an ai|>oi is yah br«'|»r-
yus 19, yah nta Htandandona, insandi-
de<Iun du imma, haitandona ina.

3 a Yah setun l»i ma managri ; qr|>un

31 Da com to him his m( (ior and his
gobrodra, and dar litc stodon, and to
him scndon. and to him clypwlon.

32 And myccl mcnigu jrmb hinc swt

9
7

;

III. 17-32.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 152.6.

177

1

And James of Zebede and Joon, the
brother of James, and he putte to hem
names Boonerges, that is, the sones pf
thondrynge

18 And Andrew and Philip, and Bar-
tholomewe and Mathew, and Thomas
and James Alfey, and Thadee and Sy-
mount Cananee,

And Judas Scarioth, that bitraide

And thei comen to an hous,

1

hym.

20 And the cumpanye of peple came
togidre eftsoone, so that thei mi^te not
nether ete breed.

2 I And whanne his hynnesmen hadden
herdde, thei wenten out for to holde
hym ;
for he is
turnyd in to wodenesse.

sothely thei seiden,

22 And the scribis that camen doun
fro Jesusalem, seiden, For he hath Belse-
bub, and for in the prince of deuels he
castith out fendis.

23 And, hem gadrid togidre, he seide
to hem in parabHs, Hou may Sathanas
caste out Sathanas %

24 And if a rewrae be departide in

itself, the ilke rewme may not stonde.

17 And he called James the sonne of
Zebede and Jhon, James brother, and
gave them Bonarges to name, which is
to saye, the sonnes of thounder ;

18 And Andrewe and Philippe, and
Bartlemewe and Mathewe, and Thomas
and James the sonne of Alphey, and
Taddeus and Symon of Cane,

19 And Judas Iscarioth, whiche same
And they came

also betrayed hym.
vnto housse,

20 And the people assembled togedder
agayne, so greattly that they had nott
leesar somoche as to eate breed.

21 And when they that longed vnto
hym herde oflf it, they went out to holde
hym ; for they sayde, he ys to fervent.

22 And the scribes which came from
Jerusalem, sayde, He hath Beelzebub,
and by the power off the chefe devyll
casteth out devylles.

23 And he called them vnto hym, and
in similitudes sayde vnto them, Howe
can Satan drive out Satan ?

24 And yf a realme be dcvided ageynste

it silfe, that realme cannot endure.

25 And if an hous be disparpoilid on

25 And if a housse be devided agaynste

it self, thilke hous may not stonde.

26 And if Sathanas hath risen a3eins
hym self, he is di.sparpoilid, and he shal
not mowe stonde, but hath an ende.

27 No man, gon in to a stronge mannes
hous, may take awey his vessels, no but
he bynde firste the stronge man, and
thanne
shal diuersly rauyshe his
hous.

lie

it silfe, that housse cannot continue.

26 So yf Satan make insurreccion a-
gaynste him silfe, and be devided, he
can not continue, but hath an ende.

27 No man can entre into a stronge
take awaye hys
mans housse,
gooddes, excepte he fyrste bynde that
hys
stronge man, and then
housse.

spoyle

and

28 Trewly I seie to 50U, for alle synnes
and blasphcmyc'S, by whiche thei han
blasfcmcd, shulen be for3ouen to the
soncs of men,

29 Sothely he that shal blasfemc a^cins
the Jloly Gost, shal not hauc remissioun
in to with outen eend, l/ut he shal be
gilty of cuerlustynge tresi)as.

30 For thei Hcidcii, He hath an unclcnc

28 Verely I saye vnto you, that all
synnes shalbc forgcven vnto mens chyl-
dren, and blaspheme, where with they
l>laspheme.
. 29 liut he that blasi)hemeth the Holy
Goost, shall never have forgevenes, but
is in daunger of eternall danipnacion.

30 For they sayde, \\v had an vnclcnc

8i)irit.

8j)rete,

31 And his modir and brethcrcn comen,
and thei Htondynge with oute forth,
senten to liyjn, clcpynge jiym.

32 And u cunipany sat uboutc liyrn ;

31 And there cam his mother and his
])rithn'n, and stodc^ with oute, and sent
vnto liiiM, and called hym.
32 And the j)eople sate aboute hym ;

N

17«

noTiric, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON. 995.

[St MAUit

|ian

«lu

iimiift, Sai !

nijx-i

|'i iua. yah

i>r(>}'ryu9
uta sokyaiul jnik.

|>oiiiai yah swistryua

|)oinos

33 Yah amlhof im qil'aiKls, "VMio ist bo
ai|>ei meina aij>|mu })ai l)ro|'ryus meinai ?

34 Yah hisaiwhands liiHunynno, J)anfl
ui|)ci raeina

(|a|i, Sai !

bi Hik sitaiKhiiiH,

yali hai l)ru|»ryus laeiuai.

and fo him cwfr<lon. Ht'r is «1in mtnlor,
and dine gebrodru litc and soca{7 dc.

33 Tic <1a him andswarodc and cw«|»,
Ilwylc is min niodor and mine ge-
brodru ?

34 And he cwrp|», da behealdende. de
him itbiiton Bsrtdn, Uer is min niudor
and mine gebrodru.

3- >a( 1 aiiis waiirkri|> wilyan Oiil^, na
yah hrujiar iiiciiis, yah swistur, yah aiJHri

iut.

35 Sojjlicc 8C de dej^ Godcs wiliaii. S4*
is min modor, and min bnKtui, and
swustor.

Chap. TV.

i Yah aftra icsus du^ann
laisyan at inarein ; yali j^desun sik (hi
iimna inanaf^eins filu, swaswe Tna ga-
lt'i)mn(hin in skip, j^asitan in marein, yah
nUa so niauagei wijira niarcin, ana 8ta|>a
was.

Chap. IV.

i And oft he ongan hi
a?t da-re sae Isernn ; and him wa»8 mycel
menegu to gegadtTcKl, swa da-t he on
w.n<9, and
Bcip code, and on dtere sa>
call seo menegu ymbe da nt wks, oq
lande.

2 Vail hiisida ins in ifaMikom manng.

Yah (lajj ini "in lals( inai siinai.

2 And ho hi fola on '
And liiin to <'\v;»|> on 1

'lum la^rde.

3 TTausoi|i.

Sai ! urrann sa s^iiands du

3 LJthyra|).^

U't eodc >

-'

itis

Biiian fraiwa soinainnia.

88cd to siiweune.

4 Yali war|> niijijjanei saiso, sum raihtis
gadraus faur wig, yah qemun fuglos, yali
frt-tun jiata.

4 And dii he sew, sum feoll wid done
weg, and fugelas comon, and hit frirton.

f'f An|iani|> |»an gadraus ana stainaham-
; vali

nia. jiarri ni hahai<la airj»a ii
biHH urranii. in JM/ci ni lial'
08 air|>os

ij>aiz-

6 At Nunniii |'an iiriiiniandin, ufhrann,

yah nntr ni haltaida \\aint:ii>i.

":i|).tiirs-

tiixhi.

7 ^ all sum ^'adiaiis in )>ituinunH. vah
ufarstignn {lai biiurnyuM, yah afwha]>ided-
un jiata, yah akran ni gaf.

H Vah sum gadraiH i'u air|ia goda, ynh
gaf akran. tirrinnandu, yah wahsyando ;
yah bar ain M yah ain .»/. yah uin r.

5 Sum feoll ofer stan-scyligean, dar
: and s *na up-
de c«>r|an j^icc-

hit na*fdo mycolo •
etHlo, fordam de 1
nesse.

'

'

6 Da hit U]'
SMTtrldo, and i
wyrtnmian na^fdo.

MO hit for-
hit

i.liin

7 Antl sum fooll on JH»rnas. (\.i stigon
da |>ornas, and for|>ry8mo<lon da>t, and
hit wn'stm ne baT.

8 And simi fooll on gi>d land, an<i hit
^ ^' 'xondo. v — :

'

aeahlo.upi' • -
and Tin im :
fealdne, sum hund-tValdne.

ic. sum

9 Yah (|a|», Saci habai ausonahnn<?vnnd-

9 And he cwh»J», Oehyrc, so do oaran

ona, guhuiisyai.

ha*bl»e to gohyrannc.

10 T|» bi|>f war|> snndro. frrhnn lua pax
bi i'na mi|> )>aim twalibim |>i/«>s gajruk-
OUB.

10 And da he ana w.ts. liino ji\o«1.>ti
da*t bigsj>ell da twilfo (\c mid iiim
wsrroQ.

III. 33.-IV. 10.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

179

and thei seien to hym, Lo ! tin modir,
and thei
bretheren with outen forth
seken thee.

33 And he answerynge to hem seith,
Who is my modir and my bretheren ?

and sayde vnto hym, Beholde ! thy
mother, and thy brethren seke for the
with out.

33 And he answered them saynge,
Who ys my mother and my brethren 1

34 And biholdynge hem aboute, that
saten in the cumpas of hym, he seith,
Lo ! my modir and my bretheren.

35 Forsoth who that doth the will of
God, he is my brother, and my sister,
and modir.

34 And he loked rounde about on his
disciples, which sate in compasse about
hym, and sayde, Beholde ! my mother
and my brethren.

35 For who soever doeth the will off
God, he is my brother, my syster, and
mother.

Chap. IV.

1 And eft Jhesus bigan
for to teche at the see ; and myche
cumpany of peple is gedrid to hym, so
that he styinge in to a boot, sat in the
see, and al the cumpany of peple was
aboute the see, on the lond.

2 And he tau3te hem in parablis many
And he seide to hem in his

thingis.
techynge,

3 Heere 5ee.

Loo ! a man sowynge

goth out for to sowe.

4 And the while he sowith, an other
seed felde aboute the wey, and briddis
of heuene^ camen, and eeten it.

5 Forsothe an other felde doun on
stony placis, wher it had nat myche
erthe ; and anoon it sprong vp, for it
hadde nat depnesse of erthe.

6 And whenne the sunne rose vp, it
welwide for hecte, and it dried vp, for
it hadde not roote.

7 And an other felde doun into thorncs,
and thornes stieden vp, and strangliden
it, and it 3aue not fruyt.

8 And an other felde doun in to good
lond, and ^aue fruyt, styinge vp, and
wexiiigc ; and oon brou3te tliritty fold,
and oon sixty fold, and oon an hundrid-
fold.

9 And he seide, lie that hath oris of

hceryng, liecre.

10 And whenne he was Hingulcr,*^ the
twelue that wercn with hym axidcn hym
for to expowne the parable.

Chap. IV.

i And he began agayne
to teache then by the see syde ; and
there gadered to gedder vnto hym moche
people, so greatly that he entred in to
a shippe, and sate in the see, and all
the people was by the see syde, on the
shoore.

2 And he taught them many thynges
And sayde vnto them

in similitudes.

in his doctrine,
3 Herken to.

Beholde !

the sower

went forth to sowe.
4 And it fortuned as he sowed, that
some fell by the waye syde, and the
fowles off the ayre cam, and devoured
it vppe.

5 Some fell on a stony grounde, where
it had not moche erth ; and by and by
sprange vppe, because it had not deepth
of erth.

6 And as sone as the sun was vppe, it
caught heet, and because it had nott
rotynge, it wyddred awaye.

7 And some fell amonge the thorncs,
and the thornes grewe vppe, and choked
it, so that it gave no frutc.

8 And some fell apon good grounde,
and did yelde frute, that sprongc, and
grewe; and brought forthe sonic thirty
folde, some fourty folde, and some an
hundred folde.
9 And lie sayde vnto them, He that
hath earcH to heare, lett hym licarc.

10 When lie wuH alone, they that wore
aboute hym with the twelve axed hym
of the similitude.

N2

2

180

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Maiik

1 I Ya!i f|a|> Vni, Izwis at'/iluin i-it kun-
nan ruiia [>iu(laiipirily«)S (Ju|»s.
Ij? yuin-
aim j>aiiii xiia, in gayukun uUuUi wuir))i|),

11 And he sspde him, Kow is ^oseald
to witunnc G«>dc8 rices j^erinu.
l)ani ile
ute Kynd, ealle j'ing on bigKjH.*llum ge-
wurdaj).

I 2 Ki saiwliandans saiwhuina, yah ni
guuniyaina, yah huusyaiuluii.s hausyaina,
nil»ai whan piwand-
yah ni fraj^yaina ;
yaiiia sik, yah utlctainduu iiu fruwuurht-

eis.

I _; Yah «ia|> <hi

J)0 pa-
ynkon 1 yah whaiwa alios (>o8 gayukons
kuiin('i|i ?

ini, Ni witu|>

14 Sa saiyands, waurcl Haiyi|>.
15 A|»|>an \nn

wijjra wi^ sind,

)>arei
saiada \>iiti\ waurd ; yah )>an LTahaiisyand
nnkaryaiis, suns <|inii|) Satanas, yah us-
iiinii|) waurd })atu iusaiuno in hairtuni

ize.

16 Yah sind samaloiko J)ai ana stain-
ahanuna saianans,
|>an hausyand
\>iiUi waurd, suns nii)> fahudui uinuuid

jiaiei

i'ta

;

17 Yah ni hnband wnurtins in sis, ak
wh('ilawhairl>ai h\iu\ ; j)a)>n)h l»i}M' (jiniij)
ai^lo. ai)>|»au wrakya in |)is waurdis, suns
ganiarzyaiida.

1

Dn?t hi geseonde gcseon, and na ne
geseon, and j;ehyrende gehyron, and ne
onpyton ;
hi hwa-nne syn t;e-
eyrcde, and him siu hyra nynna fur-
g}fene.

de-ln'S

13 Da garde he him, Ge n\'ton dig
hi^pell 1 and hu mage ge ealle bigHi>ell
wiUn ?

I 4 So etc sicw|>, word he 8.tw|>.
15 S6|)lice da synd wid done wog, dar
djL't word is ges;iwen ; and donne hi hit
;;('liyni|», sona cyni|> Satanas, antl afyr|»
dat word do on hcora hcortuu a:»;Iweii
ys.

16 And da 8}'nd gel ice de 8}iid ofer da
stan-scylian gesjiwen, sona dn*nne
hi
da't word gehyra|», and diet mid blisse
oufo|> ;

be«»|>

17 And hi nahha}^ wjTtruman on him,
syddan
ac
u|>cyin|> deoth's costnung, and his chthys
for dam worde,

unstadolfa'ste ;

and

iH Yah j>ai Hind jiai in )>aumuns saian-

18 Hi synd on |>t>rnuin rros:Iwen da*t

ans ;

|»ai waurd hausyandan.s,

synd ; da de diet word gehyra}%

I (^

^';ih

<iiii_MS

|m/.(»s

lihainais, yah 1

i(> And of

yrm|>e,

an<l

-",'

' *me

afn«arz«iii> -il" IMS, yah |»ai hi }iata jinj»ar
afwliapyand
justyus
jwta waurd, yah ukranalaus wair|)i|>.

Vnnat;;agLCandan»,

I

worold wi'Ionju and odra j^t >
dwt wonl <»f-|»rysmia|», and synd biit*»n
waestine gewordenc.

.1,

20 Yah |>ai sind \ni\ ana air)mi t>izai
godon Miianans,
hausyand l^ata
waurd, yah andnimand, yah akran bair-
and, ain 7. yah ain .y. yah ain .r.

)mii>i

21 Yah i\n\t du im, lluii lukarn (|imi|>,
du)M> I'i uf inolan satyHidau, ai|>)>au un-
dar ligrl niu ci ana lukarnagtal'an sat-
yaidau ?

20 And da de gesawcne 8yn<l ofer d.vt
gode laiui, da synd i\o du't wonl ge-
hyra)>, and onfo|>, and w:v5lni bringa|f,
sum I'ritig-fcaldno, sum syxtig-fcaKlne,
and sum hund-ftuildne.

21 lie Kwtle him. Cwj-st dii ryni|) da t
hit beo under bydrne
lcoht-fn»t,
iiset, cHlde under Ix^hle ? wite geare» dn't
hit sy ofer candel sta>f aset 7

dft't

22 Nih allis int wha fulginis, JHitei ni
galmirhtyaidau ; nih war[) analaugn, ak
ci s>\ikun|> wall) ai.

N

a

23 S6|ihVc nis nan |>ing hehydd. do no
„^, „j^ jifgig gcwonlen,

'

'

\ CO cunic.

8
7
1

1

;

;

IV. 11-22.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

181

11 And he seide to hem, To 50U it
is 50uen for to knowe the mysterie^ of
Sothely to hem
the kyngdam of God.
that ben with oute forth, alle thingis ben
maad in parablis,

12 That thei seynge se, and se nat,
and thei heerynge heere, and vnder-
stonde not ; that sum tyme thei be con-
uertid, and synnes be for50uen to hem.

13 And he seith to hem, Witen not
5ee this parable 1 and howe 5ee shulden
knowe alle parablis ?

14 He that sowith, sowith a word.
15 These sothly ben that aboute the
weye, where the word is sowun ; and
whenne thei han herd, anoon cometh
Sathanas, and takith awey the word
that is sowun in her hertis.

16 And also these ben that ben sown
on a stoon, the whiche whanne thei han
herd the word, anoon taken it with
ioye;

1

And thei han nat roote in hem silf,
but thei ben temporal ;^ afterward tri-
bulacioun sprongen vp, and persecucioun
for the word, anoon thei ben sclaundrid.

1

And there ben other that ben sowun
in thornis ; these it ben, that heeren
the word,

19 And myseiste of the world, and
disseit of richessis, and other cliarge of
coueitise entrynge ynne, strangulen the
word, and it is maad with outen fruyt.

20 And these it ben that ben sowun
on good lond, the whiche hercn the
word, and taken, and maken fruyt, oon
thritti fold, oon sixti fold, and oon an
hundrid.

2

And he seide to hem,Whcr a lanterne
come, that it be put vndir a ])UHliel 1
wher not, that it be put vpon a candil
stike ]

22 Forsothe thcr is no thing hid, that
shal not be maad opyn ;
neth(;r oriy
thing is J)r(Miy, the whiche shal not conic
in to apert.

1

And he saide vnto them, To you it
is geven to knowe the mistery of the
kyngdom of God.
But vnto them that
are with out, shall all thinges be done in
similitudes,

12 That when they se they shall se,
and not discerne, and when they heare
they shall heare, and not vnderstonde
leste at any tyme they shulde tourne,
and their synnes shulde be foryeven
them.

13 And he sayde vnto them, Perceave
ye not this similitude 1 and howe ye
shall knowe all similitudes 1

14 The sower soweth the worde.
15 These be they whiche are by the
wayes syde, where the worde is sowen ;
to whom as sone as they have herde itt,
commeth the devyll, and takith awaye
the worde that was sowen in
their
hertes.

16 And these also are they that are
sowen on the stony grounde, which
when they have herde the worde, att
once they rcceave it with ioye

17 Yett have no rote in themselves,
and so endure but for a season ; after-
warde as sone as eny trouble or perse-
the wordes sake,
cucion ariseth, for
anon they fall.

18 And these are they that are sowen
amonge the thornes ; which heare the
worde of God,

disseytfulnes

19 And the care of this worlde, and
of ryches, and the
the
lustes of other thynges entre in, and
choocke the worde, and it is made vn-
frutfull.

20 And these are they that are sowen
in good grounde, which heare tlic worde,
and receave it, and brynge forth frute,
some thirty folde, some sixty folde,
some an hundFcd folde.

lighted, to

21 And he sayde vnto tlicm, Is the
put vnder a
candle
buHshell, or vnder the borde ? ys it not
therforc lighted, that it shulde 1)0 put
on a can(l(;]Hticke ?

be

22 For there is no thinge so prevy,
nether
shall come

be opcined ;
that

nott
butt

it

that

hIiuII

so sccHM't,
abroadc.

1

182

r.OTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

23 Valuii wliiLS lml)ai uusona Imusyand-

23 Gehyre, gif hwa earan ha^bhe to

oiia, ;^iiiau.s)ai.

gc'liyranne.

24 Yuh qa|> (lu ini, SaiwhiJ) wha haiw-
niitaila
ci)>.
izwis, yah hiaiika<la izwis }iuiin j^'alauh-
yandaiiL

In |>i7,aiL'i

miti)T,

ntita)>

24 And he cwk^ to him, Wamia)»
hwKt ge gchyron. And on dam grnute
(tc gc mcta|>, cow bi|> gcmetcu, and cow
bi[> gc-ict.

25 Untc }>i8whammch saci halmi|>, ^ih-
ada ininia. yah saci ni hahai|>, yali jiatoi
halmij), atuiiiiada iiumu.

25 ihitn bi|) gescaUl dc ]urf)», and «1am
dc naf)>, cac da't he ba?f)), him hip
ffit-brodcD.

26 Yah (|a|i, Swa ist ))iii(lanpanli Gu|)8,
Bwaswo yaliai iiiauna waiq)i|> fraiwa ana
air|m,

27 Yah Kk'|ii|>, yah urreisiji nalit yah
daga, yah |)atu fraiw kcini]), yah liudij),
8\ve ni wait is.

28 Silho auk air|>a aknin Imiri}), fnnn-
ist i:;n\ii, |)a|)roh ahs, ))aj)ioh fullcijj kaurn-
18 in |>amma ahsa.

29 panuh ])i})C atjphada akran, suns

'insandei)) gilj^a, untc alL^t as;uis.

30 Yah qa|>, Whc galcikom )>iudan-
ai)>|mu in whilcikai ga-

gardya Gu|>8 i
yukon gid»airani |)o ?

3

8we kaurno sinajiis, J'atoi j^an saiada
ana airjia, niinnist allaize fniiwe ist |>ize
ana airpai ;

\\>

alhii/.e

32 Yali \ynn Raia<hi, uninni|>, yah \vair}»-
gatnuyi})
a^tans niikihins, swaswc magun uf sktuU
au is fuglus himinis gabauan.

niaist ;

gra.se

yali

33 Yah fTW'aleikaini

ga-
yukoui rodltla ^\n iin jiata waurd, swa-
fiwc nialitcihin hausyon ;

nianagaim

34 I)} inuh gayuk<»n ni rmlithi 'iin.

][|>

sundro 8i]K>nyam scinaiiu andlmnd al-

lata.

35 Yah qa|> (hi ini, in yainaniina <|ju,nt,
at andnnahtya [mn waur|Ninatnnia, Us-
hM|>ani yainis Htadis.

36 Yah aflt'tjiiuhins |>o nianagein, and-
neman ina. hwc waa in nkipa ; ywh ^an
an|>Arn nkipa wrsun n)i|> iiinna.

37 ^
wegoH
yii]>]in gafullnuda.

.

' skuni win«lis inikilii, yah
.. dun in .skip, swiiswc lUi

:

26 And he cwB|»y Qodes noe ya, gwyloe
man wurpe god saed on his land, and
siiwc,

27 And arise da^ges and nihtcs, and
dat sanl growe, and wcxe, donnc he naL

28 Soj'licc sylf-willcs sen eor|»e wa?stm
bcra|), arrest gxcrs, syddjin Ciir, syddan
fiilne hwsetc on dam eare.

29 And donnc se wa^tm hinc forf)-
bring|>, Bona he sent his sicol, fordam
dtt*t rip a^t is.

30 And eft he cwa'|». For hwam ge-
anlicie we heofcna rice ? oddc hwylcura
bigspelle widnictc we hit ?

31 Swa swii soncpcs sard, donnc hit
h\\> on corj'an gesawcn, hit is calm sa-da
l»8t dc on cor|>an synd ;

32 And dtninc hyt ns;^wcn h\\>,

hit
a.stili}>, and bi|> ealra wyrti* inavst : and
ha'f|> swa myccle l>oga8, da't hcofcnca
fugelas eardiao magon under his sceade.

33 And mancgum su-jlcum bigs|M'lhim
ho spnec to him, daet hi mihton ge-
hyran ;
34 Nc BpaK he na butan bigspollc.
Eall he his Iconiing-cnihtum lisundron
rdite.

35 And 8»de him, donnc a'fcn bi|»,
Uton faran agen.

36 An<l da nienigu forlactendc, hi on-
feogon hinc, iwa he on avxpc wa^ ; and
odrc Bcipu wvron mid him.

<l I

37

\i'l

wiinhs
pew«'i'i' u. and yj'a ho ;iwrar|i vii diut
8C}1), dat hit gcfyllctl w;« >.

w;i's mvrel y>«t

;

;

;

IV. 23-37-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

183

23 If ony man haue eeris of heryng,

heere he.

24 And he seide to hem, Se 5ee what
In what mesure ^ee raeten,
5ee heeren.
it shal be meten to ^ou^ and be kast to
50U.

25 Sothely it shal be ^ouen to hym
that hath, and it shal be taken awey
from hym that hath not, also that that
he hath.

26 And he seide. So the kingdom of
God is, as if a man caste seed in to the
erthe,

27 And it slepe, and ryse vp in ni3t
and day, and brynge forth seed, and
wexe faste, the while he wote not.

28 Forsothe the erthe by his owne
worchynge makith fruyt, first an erbe,^
afterward an eere, afterward ful fruyt in
the ere.

29 And whanne of it silf it hath brou^t
forth fru3i;, anoon he sendith a sikil,''^ for
rype corn cometh.

30 And he seide. To what thing shulden
we likene the kyngdom of God 1 or to
what parable shulen we comparisoune it ?
31 As a com of seneueye, the which
whann it is sowun in the erthe, is lesse
than alle seedis that ben in erthe ;

32 And whanne it is bredd,^ it sty^eth
vp in to a tree, and is maad more than
alle wortis ;• and it shal make grete
braunchis, so that briddis of heuene
mowe dwelle vndir the shadewe ther of.
33 And in many siche parablis he spac

to hem a word, as thei mi3ten heer

34 Sothely he spak not to hem with
Forsothe he cxpounydo
outen parable.
alle thingis on sidis
to his disciplis
hond.^

35 And he scith to hem, in that day,
whenne euenyng was maad, Fassc wc
a3einward.

36 And thei Iccuynge the cumpanye
of pcplo, taken hym, so that ho was in
the boot ; and other bootis wcren with
hym.
37 And a ^Tcct stormc of wynd is
mtuid, and Hciitc! whwih in to the boot,
80 that tlie boot was iul.

23 Yf eny man have eares to heare,

lett him heare.

24 And he sayd vnto them, Take hede
what ye heare.
With what measure ye
mete, with the same shall it be measured
vnto you agayne.

25 And vnto you that have shall more
be geven, for vnto hym that hath shall
it be geven, and from hym that hath
nott, shall be taken awaye, even that he
hathe.

26 And he sayd. So is the kyngdom
of God, even as yf a man shulde sowe
seede in the grounde,

27 And shuld slepe, and rise vp night
and daye, and the seede shulde springe,
and growe vppe, whyll he is not ware.

28 For the erth bryngeth forthe frute
first the blad, then the

off her silfe,
eares, after that full corne in the eares.

29 As sone as the frute is brought
forth, anon he throusteth in the sykell,
be cause that hervest is come.

30 And he sayde. Where vnto shall we
lyken the kyngdom off God 1 or with
what compareson shall we compare it 1

31 It is lyke a grayne off mustardseed,
which when it is sowen in the erth, is the
leest of all seedes that be in the erth ;

32 And after that it is sowen, it grow-
eth vppe, and is greatest of all yerbes
and bereth greate braunches, so that
the fowles off the ayre maye dwell vnder
the shadowe of it.

33 And with many soche similitudes
he preached the worde vnto them, after
as they myght heare it
34 And with out similitude spake ho
])ut when they
nothinge vnto them.
were a parte he expounded all thingcs
to his disciples.

35 And the same daye, when even was
come, he sayde vnto them, Lett vs passe
over into the other syde.

36 And they late the people doparte,
and tokc him, even as lie was in the
shippe ; there were also with him other
8hip|K)S.

37 And there arose a great stornie of
wyndc, and dusHhcil th(^ wiives into the
shippe, so tliat it was lull.

IH4

GOTHIC. 36o.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

38 Y»ih wiiH IS nrrn notin. anji wnpp-
V»l» urraisidediiii iiia,
ftn'a
yah qe|>uii du iinma, I>aisari, niu kara
|)uk, ^izei frutiistnain ?

HlrjuiiidH.

38 And he wips on scipe, ofer holster
And lu awehton hine, and
slapcnde.
cwa^don, No belinipj* to dc, da»t we
forweorda|> 1

]i) Val» urnisaiulrt, ^'asok winda, yah
t\i\\> du marein, Gaslawai, afdundm. Yah
aiuwilaida m winds, yah war|> wis mikil.

40 Yah (|a|) <\n

iin, Duwlic faiirhtai
^Vhaiwa ni nauh habai}>

siyiij) swa /
pahiuhrin i

41 Yali ohtcdun sis aips inikil. yah
luisso, Whas |»aumi sa
qe|'Uii
siyai I unto yah winds yah niarei uf-
huusyand inima.

sis

(hi

39 And he aras, and dam windc Ihj-
b^d, and cw»|» to dare sn', Suwo, and
And so win<l j^eswac da, and
gestil.
wear|> myccl sniyltiifs.

40 And he ssede him, liwi svnd go

forhtc ?

Gyt ge nabbaj) gclcafan ?

41 And hi micelum epe him ondre(h»n,
and fwjrdon jtIc to (Klrum. Hw.it wi'ii'^t
dii. hwa t is dea ? da't him windas and
8x hyrsumiu)).

Chap. V.

i Yah qeniun hinchir mar-

ClTAP. V.^

I Da comon hi ofrr ^Irro

ein in hin{hi (hukhircni'.

8JCS nuijmn on da't rice Hit-nusonorum.

2 Vah ns^':i<^'<4]indin

itnnia ns ski]>a.
puns <;an)otida iinnia manna us aurali-
yum in ahmin unhrainyannna.

3 Sat'i liauain

Iiahaiihi in anraliyom,
yali ni naiidihandyi>ni cisurnciuaiin man-
na nialita ina ^^nhindan.

4 Tntc is ufta cisarnam bi fotuns
gahuj^anaim yah nandil»andyom t'isarn-
cinaim ^^ahiiiuhinH was, yaii
(^ahuisida
|>«>s naiicHhandyos, yah |m) ana
af sis
fotum oisarna pdtrak, yah manna ni
niahta ina pitamyan.

5 Yah sintcinu, nahtam yah (ht^nin, in
n. was ljroj»-
:ainam.

nurahy«»m yali in fail
yunds, yah hliLTU'waii'

2 And h^Tii of Si
sona np'n arn an Til
on unchenum gaste.

1. him
^ ^«num

3 Se liR'fde on hyr^ennm scra'f, and
n<»

hine nln man mid rucentoa^^nm
milite gehindan.

4 Fordam he oft mid fot-ropsum and
racenteaL^nm gehunden, toslrit da rarot-
ea^ra, and da fot-eopsas tohra^c, and hine
nan man gewyldan nc mihtc.

5 And B^mlc, deges and nihtoa, he
w.'i's on hyrgenum and on miintuin,
hrymende, and hinr svlfnc mid st inuni
ceorfende.

6 Oasaiwhands )>an Irsji tairnij'm, rann,

6 S6|)liec da he (Umv llalond toorran

ynli in wait ina,

7 Yah hropyands Rtilmai mikiini, qn|>,
\Vlia mis yah |'us. tcsu, sunau (iu|»8 |>is
hauhistiiiH I
)>i (Ju)>a, ui
halwyais mis.

liiswam |>iik

gesenh, he am, and hine gehavl.

7 And myeelre stemne hrymen<le. and
Kalii ma-ni Ha'lend. (mmIos
Ic Imlsige

dus cwn^l',
Hunu. hwn>t is me and de \
d(' |iurh Ciod, da^t dii me ne |^reage.

8 T^nto qa|i immn, Fs^Rj^, ahma un-

8 Da ewR")) se Ilni'lend, Flala unelsena

hrainya, us {>amtna mann.

9 Yuli frail ina, Wha nam«> |>cin t Yah
qa|> (hi inimti, Namo nicin hiigaiun; unto
nnuuif^ai siyuni.

ga«t. ga of dysum men.

9 Da ahsode he h}Tie, Hwirt is din
he, Min nama \a
namat
legio : fordam we man^a synd

Da ewH>|>

IV. 38.-V. p.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

38 And he was in the hyndir part of
And
the boot, slepynge on a pilewe.
thei reysen hym, and seien to hym,
Maistre, perteneth it nat to thee, that
we perishen"?

39 And he rysynge vp, manasside to
the W3nid, and seide to the see, Be stille,
And the wynd ceeside,
wexe doumb.
and greet pesiblenesse is maad.

40 And he seith to hem. What dreden

5ee 1 Nat 5it han ^ee feith 1

TYXDALE, 1526.

185
38 And he was in the sterne, a slepe
And they awoke hym,
on a pelowe.
and sayde vnto hym, Master, carest
thou nott, that we perisshe]

39 And he rose vppe, and rebuked the
wynde, and sayde vnto the see. Peace,
and be still. And the wynde alayed,
and there folowed a greate calme.

40 And he sayde vnto them. Why
it that ye

are ye fearfull ? Howe is
have no fayth 1

41 And thei dredden with greete dreed,
and seiden to eche other. Who, gessist
thou, is this ? for the wynd and the see
obeyshen to hym.

41 And they feared excedingly, and
sayde won to an other. What felowe is
for booth wynde and see obey
this ?
hym.

Chap. V.

i And thei camen ouer
the wawe of the see into the cuntree
of Genazareth.

2 And anoon a man in vnclene spirit
ran out of a biryel, to hym goynge out
of the boot.

3 The whiche man hadde an hous in
graues,^ and nether with chaynis now
mi3te eny man bynde hym.

4 For oft tymes he bounden in stockis
and chaynes, hadde broken the chaynes,
and liadde brokun the stockis to smale
go))otis, and no man mi3te daunte^
hym.

Chap. V.

i And they cam over to
the other syde off the see in to the
countre of the Gaderens.

2 And when he was come out ot the
sliippe, anon mett hym out ot the graves
a man possessyd of an vnclene sprete.

3 Which had his abydinge amonge the
graves, and no man coulde bynde hym
with cheynes.

4 Be cause that when he was often
bounde with fetters and cheynes, he
plucked the chaynes asundre, and brake
the fetters in peces, nether coulde eny
man tame him.

5 And euer more, ni3t and day, in
biriols and liillis, he was cryingc, and
betynge hym silf with stoones.

5 And alwayes, boothe nyght and daye,
he cryed, in the mountaynes and in the
graves, and bet hym silfe with stones.

6 Sothely he scynge Jhesus afer, ran,

and worshipide hym.

7 And he cryinge with greet voice,
Bcide, What to mc and to thee, tliou
Jhesu, the sone of God hieste ]
1 con-
ioure thee bi God, that thou tourmcnte
not me.

6 When he had spied Jesus afarre of,

he ranne, and worshipped him.

7 And cryed with a lowdc voycc, and
sayde. What have I to do with the,
Jesus, the sonnc of the moost liyest
I rcciuyre the in the name of
(iod?
God, that thou tornuiut me nott.

8 Forsothc JlicKUH soidc to hym, Tliou

8 For he had sayd vnto hym, iUnwv,

vnclene sjjirit, go out fro tlie man.

9 And JhcHUH axide hym, Wliat name
is to thee? And ho scith to hym, A
legioun is name to me ;
for we l^en
manyc.

forthc of the man, tliou fowh; H[)ret('.

9 And he axed hym, What is thy
nan)e ? And he anshwercd hym, My
name is legion ;

for we are many.

4

1

isr,

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

10 Yah ba|> iiia filu, ci ui u&tircbi im

10 And ho hine swydc baed, dxt bo

us luuda.

bine of dam rice ne uydde.

I T

Wjvsuli jmn yainar hainla sweinc

1

Dar wiefl emW done munt mycel

halilaiia at jiaiiiiiia fair^^unya.

swyna licord licswigcnde.

12 Yah lie<liin iDa alios |>o8 unliiil|>ons,
qi|>an(loins, Insandei unsis in |>o Hweiiui,

ci in )>o i;al«-i})ainia.

13 Yah uslaiibida im (esus suns.

Yah
usL'ii'/U'andana ahnians j>ai unhrainyans
|>(» Hwcina. yah rann so liair-
^Ml;j»nn in
da and driuson in inarcin, wesunii)>-|>an
8W(' twort jiusundyos, yah afwlmpnodcdun
in niarein.

1

Yah \n\i haldandans |>o sweina, ga-
jilauhnn, yah i^'ataihun in haur^. yah "in
hainioni ; yah qeniiin, saiwhan wha wcsi
|)atii waurjiano.

15 Yah atiddyodun du fesua, yah ga-
saiwhand
Kitnndan yah
piwasidana, yah fra|iyandan, |)ana saci
hai»aida laigaion ; yah uhtedun.

w«)dan,

jiana

16 Yah spillcKlcdun im, jjaioi

gase-
whnn, whaiwa warj> hi j>ana wodan, yah
bi |>o swt'ino.

I 7 Yah diignnnun bidyan Tna, galei|>an

12 And da uncla'nan

gostaa hyne
bn'don, and cwa*don. Send u.s on daa
8wyn, da-t we on hi grg.'n.

13 And da lyfdc se Ilselend sona. An»l
da codon da unclsenan gastas un da
swyn, and on niycluni hryrr seo hoord
wear|) on sap l>c8cofen, twii |>u84'ndo, and
wurdon adruncene on dicrc ax.

14 S6j)lice da de hi heoldon, flugon,
and cyddon on da»rc cciistro, and on
landc ; and lii ut -codon, diet hi gcstiwon
hwait dar godon waTC.

15 And hi comon to dam Ha'lcndc,
and hi gcsawon done do mid deofle
gcdrcht wn»8, gcscnMnc sittan. and halca
modes ; and hi him ondrcdun.

16 And hi rchton him, da de hit f^O'
sawon, hu hit gcdon wr'S W dam de
doofol-soocnease hjefdc, and \>c dam
swynum.

17 And hi bscdon, da;t he of hyra

liindar inarkos scinos.

gemjprum fore.

18 Yah inngjigpandan ina in skip, !>a|>

ina w\ci was wods, ei mi}> 'ininia wcsi.

IQ Yah ni lailot ina. ak (|a|» du imma,
(Jagg du garda |>oinamnia du |>cinaim,
yah gat«ih 'i\n, whan fdn |>n.s Frauya ga-
tnwiila, yah giuinnaiila )nik.

20 Yah ga1ai|>. yah <luganji nioryan in
DaikaiMiuh'in, wlian filu gatnwida inuna
IcHUs ; yah allai siidalcikidinlun.

a I Yah UHloijmndin

8ki|>a
aftrn hindar marrin. gn<]cnuin sik man-
filu du iinma, yah was faura
Bt;«'ins

Ycsun

in

ni;ir(-in.

23 Yaii sai. qiniiji ains |)ixc 8wnag<>tjn-
fadr. nainin Yacinis, yah wuwhauda iiia,
gatlraUB du fotuni Icsaifli

18 Da he on scip eode, hine ongan
biddan, se de eer mid deoflc gcdrcht
w;v8, dn't he mid him wxrc.

19 II im da sc H.-vlcnd nc getid<Mlc, ac
he svde him, Qa to dinum hiise to
d nnni hiwnin. and ry|> I
i nivccl
.Ic dc lie.
Drihtcn gcilyde, and he g

'

"

20 And he da fenle, and ongan IkkI-
igean on Decapolim, hu fela se Hivlcnd
him dyde ; and big calle da^ wund-
rcilon.

21 And da se Hiclend efl on scypo
fcnie ofer done mujian, him com to
mycci mcnigu, and ww« yml>c da rsp.

22 And da com sum of heali-gesam-
. and da ho hyne
inc to hlti futum,

nungum. 1
geseali, lu

**

'

6
8

V. 10-22.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

187

10 And he preide hym myclie, that
he shulde nat put hym out of the
cuntreie.

11 Forsothe there was there aboute
the hill a flock of hoggis lesewynge in
feeldis.

12 And the spiritis preieden Jhesu,
seyinge, Sende vs into hoggis, that we
entre into hem.

13 And anoon Jhesus grauntide to
hem. And the vnclene spiritis entriden
in to the hoggis, and with greet bire^
the floe was cast doun in to the see, to
tweyne thousynde, and thei ben stran-
gelid in the see.

14 Sothely thei that fedden hem, fled-
den, and tolden in to the citee, and in
to the feeldis ; and thei wenten out, for
to see what was don.

15 And thei camen to Jhesu, and thei
seen hym that was traueilid of the fend,
sittynge clothid, and of hoole mynde;
and thei dreden.

1

And thei tolden to hem, that sayen,
hou it was don to hym that hadde a
fend, and of the hoggis.

17 And thei bygunnen for to preie
hym, that he shulde go awey fro her
coostis.

1

And when he stiede in to a boot, he
that was traueilid of the deuel, bygan to
preye hym, that he shulde be with hym.
19 Sotlily Jhesus resceyued hym nat,
but seith to hym, Go thou in to tliin
hous to thine, and telle to hem, hou
many tliingis the Lord hath don to thee,
and hadde mercy of thee.

20 And he wcnte forth, and bigan for
to prechc in Decapoly,^ hou manye
thiiigis Jhesus hadde don to hym ; and
alle men wondriden.

21 And whanne Jhesus hadde sticdc
in to the boot cftsoone oucr the sec,
myehc cumpanye of pcf)lc cam to^dre
to liym, and was aboute the see.

22 And oon of the princis of synagogis,
by name Jayrus, cam, and seyinge hym,
fel doun at his feet,

10 And he prayd hym instantly, that
he wolde nott sende them awaye out of
that region.

11 There was there nye vnto

the
mountayns a greate heerd of swyne fed-
inge.

12 And all the devyls besought hym,
saynge, Sende vs in to the heerde off
swyne, that we maye enter in to them.

13 And anon Jesus gave them leave.
And the vnclene spretes went out and
entred in to the swyne, and the heerd
stai'teled and ran hedlyng into the see,
they were a bout ij M. swyne, and they
were drouned in the see.

14 And the swyne heerdes fleed, and
tolde it in the cite, and in the countre ;
and they cam out, for to see what had
hapened.

15 And they cam out to Jesus, and
they sawe hym that was vexed with the
fende and had the legion,
sytt both
clothed, and in his right mynde ; and
were a frayed.

16 And they that sawe it, tolde them,
howe it had hapened vnto hym that was
possessed off" the devyll, and also of the
swyne.

17 And they began to praye hym, that

he wolde departe from their coostes.

18 And when he was come in to the
shippe, he that had the devyll, prayed
hym, that he myght be with hym.

19 Jesus wolde not soffre him, but
sayde vnto him. Goo home in to thyne
awne housse and to thy frendes, and
shewe them, what thinges the Lordc
hath done vnto the, and howe he had
compassion on the.

20 And he departed, and began to
publisshe in the ten cites, what thinges
Jesus had done vnto hym ; and all men
did mei-vcyle.

21 And when Jesus was come over
agayne in the shippe vnto tlie other
sydc, moche pcoi)le gaddercd vnto hym,
and he was wyv vnto the see.

22 And beholde, there cam vnto hym
siiiagogge,
w-on
wliose name was Jairus, and when ho
sawe hym, lie fell doune att his fete,

of the rulcirs of the

18«

noTiiic, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON. 995.

[St. Mauk

23 Vuh Imjj

iiiH

filu.

(ji|mTnl». patci

23 And liino 8v**yde Iwed, and he c^^

(laiiliUir nioinu uftiinnHt hH)iai|) ;
v'l (|iin-
ainN, la^^yuis ana }>u haiKluus, ci ganisai,
yah lilmi.

Min duhtor is on jHcmcKtum h«i« .
cum, and scic d'nc hand ofcr hi, da-i
hoc hal sy, and lybl>e.

24 Yah p^alaij) nii|> immn, yah i(l<h'C<lun
afar imnia niana^'eins filu, yah |)mihuii

llUi.

J.J Vail (jinono suma wisandci in nina

24 Da fcrde he mid him, and hini
fyli^de mycel menigeo, and jrungon
hinc.

25 And da t1at wif dc on blodcs rjno

blu|>is yera twalif,

twclf winter wses,

26 Yah inanajj {^ajjulandei frain iiianag-
aiin lekyani, yah fnyjiniaiulei allainina
Bcinanuna, yah ni waihtai l)otida, ak
iiiais wairs halmida,

27 Oahaiisyandci hi Ki'su. at^apfpandci
ill inanagein aftana, attaitok wastyai is.

26 And fram maneijum liccum ffla
|>inga |>olode, and dadde call da-t he<
ahte, and hit naht nc fremodc, ac wa-
de wyrse,

27 Da heo be dam Haclende pehynh-.
heo com wid-a*ftan da menigu, and hi-
reaf aet-hrun.

28 Unte qaj), patei yahai wastyom is

28 S6|ilico heo cwr»|), Oif ic furdon hi>

atteka, pmisa.

reafes n?t-hnne, ic beo hal.

2() Yah stinsaiw ;(;i|):nirsnn(la sa Imin-
'izo.s, yah ufkuiiJKi ana Icika

na l»l(»|»is
|)atci j^oihailncxla af ))amma alalia.

29 Antl d'l sona wcarj? 1
ryne adniwcKl, and heo on li;
dff^t heo of dam wite gebsled was.

_

'

' ''d.»«
. ddo

30 Yah sunsaiw fcsus ufkunjia "in sis
siihin |n) us sis maht ustja'^i^aiidoin, pi-
wandyands sik 111 nianagfin, qa|), WluiS
mis taituk wastyom ?

30 And da se Haclend oncneow on him
da^t him mH?j;en of code. h<
silfum
cwR^|i, bewend to da»re menigu, llwa
aet-hran mines reafes ?

31 Yah qc|>un du i'mma siponyoe is,
Saiwhis jm manaLToin j>roihaiulein J)uk,
yah (ji|>is. \Vhas nii>^ taitok ?

31 Da cwicdon his leomincr-enihtas.
Dii posyhst das meniini de |'ringendf.
auil du cwy.st, Hwii n't hnm mot

32 Yah wlaitoda, saiwhan

|>«)

jvita

32 And da beseah hine, da-t ho j* s.Iw.'

tauyandein.

33 ib so qino ojjnndci yah nMrandci,
hi lya, qam, yah
witamlci {^atri
dniuH du iiiima. yah (\n\* iiiima alia |>o
sunya.

\var|>

34 i\y is ({a|> du i/uii, I )auht4tr. pdauhoins
|>rina ijanasida ]»uk ; '^v^'^ in pnvair|>i.
yah sivais huila af |>.i!nina slaha )xMnain-

dwne de da't dyde.
33 Dat wif da on<lnrdende and forht

igende,

. com, and astrehte hi l>ef6ran

him. and sirilc him call dn^t riht.

34 Da rwn'|> sc Ilirleaid. I )t*)ht<)r. dii
f:^hafa do hiilr peclydc ; ga do on 8ihlH\
and beo of disimi h.nl.

nia.

3", NauhJMuuili 1!'
un fnim bamma hu
ans, )>atoi dauhtar |H*ina piswalt ; wha
JMUtamais drailKMS JMina laisari t

Mi-

<l-

^

_

n Him da '^\\
lum, hi oom«'n
^um. an«l owa-d
framdjim h«ah-j;r-
on. Din dohtor is dca<l ; hwi clrocst dii
Icng done iareow I

36 \\t Icsus, sunHaiw pihausyanda jiata
wanrd r<Mli|i. «ja)> du {lamma 8\\^l«{»ogm-
fada, Ni faurhtri. |>ataiiu-i gidauhoi.

36 Da he gehyrdc diet won!, da rw.vji
TTirlcDd, Nc ondrscd dii de, gelyf

fie

for an.

;

V. 23-36.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

189

23 And preiede hym myche, seyinge,
For whi my dou5ter is in the laste
thingis ; come thou, putte thin hond on
hire, that she be saaf, and lyue.

24 And he wente forth with hym, and
myche cumpanye of peple suede hym,
and oppresside hym.

25 And a womman that was in the

flux of blood twelue ^ere,

26 And hadde suffride many thingis
of ful many lechis, and spendid alle hir
thingis, and no thing prophitide, but
more hadde worse,

27 Whanne she hadde herd of Jhesu,
she cam in the cumpanye byhynde, and
touchide his cloth.

28 Sothly she seide, For if I slial

louche or his cloth, I shal be saaf.

29 And anoon the welle of blood is
dried vp, and she felide in body that
she was helid of the wound. *

30 And anoon Jhesus knowynge in
hym silf the vertu that was gon out of
hym, he, turned to the cumpenye, seith,
Who touchede my clothis 1

31 And his disciplis seiden to hym,
Thou seest the cumpenye pressinge thee,
and seist thou, Who touchide me ^

32 And Jhesus lokide aboute, for to

see hir that hadde don this thing.

33 For.-iothe

the womman dredinge
and quakynge, wityngc that it was don
in hir, cam, and fel down bifore him,
and seide to hym al trcuthe.

34 Forsothc Jliesus seide to hir, D0U5-
tir, tlii feith bath niaad tliee saf ; go in
pees, and be saf fro tlii sykenes.

35 3'fc ll''"^ Npt^'kynge, messageris camcn
to the prince of a synagoge, seyingc,
For thi dou^tir is deed ; what traueilist
thou the iiiai.stir f(;rthor(; ?

36 Forsotlie the word jjcrd that was
seide, Jhesus seith to the prince of the
synagoge, Nylc thou drcde, oouly byleue
thou.

23 And besought hym greatly, saynge.
My doughter lyith att poynt of deeth
I wolde thou woldest come, and ley thy
honde on her, that she myght be safe,
and live.

24 And he went with hym, and moche

people folowed hym, and thronge hym.

25 And there was a woman whiche was
diseased off an yssue off blonde twelve
yeres,

26 And had suffered many thinges of
many fisicions, and had spent all that
she had, and felte none amendment at
all, but wexed worsse and worsse,

27 When she had herde off Jesus, she
cam into the preace behynde hym, and
tewched hys garment.

28 For she sayde, Yf I maye butt

tewche his clothinge, I shall be whole.

29 And streyght waye her fountayne
of blonde was dreyed vppe, and she felt
in her body that she was healed off the
plage.

30 And Jesus immediatly felt in him
silfe the vertue that went out off hym,
and tourned hym rounde aboute in the
preace, and sayde. Who tewched my
clothes ?

31 And his disciples sayde vnto hym,
Thou seist the people thrustinge the on
every syde, and yet sayest. Who did
tewche me *?

32 And he loked round about, ffor to

se her thatt had done that thinge.
33 The woman feared and trembled, for
she knewe what was done with in her,
and she cam, and fell doune before hym,
and tolde hym the trueth of every thinge.
34 And lie sayde vnto her, ])oughter,
thy fayth liath saved the ; goo in peace,
and be whole off thy plage.

35 Whyll he yet spake, there cam from
the ruler of the synagogis housse cer-
tayne, wliich sayde, Tliy doughtier is
wliy dcHcascst tiiou the master
deed ;
eny further 1

36 As Hone as Jesus herde thatt worde
spoiceu, he sayde vnto tlie ruler of tiie
synagoge, Ijc not afraycd, only Ijcleve.

]!!(»

COTIIIC, 360.

37 Yah iii fnilnilot ninoliun ize mi))
I'aitni, yah lu-

sis
kohu, yah lohanncn, bro|mr iakobU.

ufar^a;,';;uii.

niliai

3S Y>ih '^ahiij) in ;;anl |)irt HWiia;,'ot,^-
Vail ;,Msa\vh auliyodu, yah grct-

fadis.
auduns yah wairfuinvhyaudaiis filu.

39 Yah innatfjftfjf^mds,

dii im,
^VIla auljyo|), yali j^reti)> ? pata barn ui
^'adau|)no<hi, ak slcpi)).

(ja|>

40 Yah hihlohun ina.

Ij) is, uswairp-
ands alluim, puiimi|) attan \>\s barnis
yah ail^oin, yah j'aiis iiii|» sis, yah galaij)
inn, |>arci wa.s j)ata barn li^^amh).

;

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Makk

37 And he nc let him acnig nc fylig-
ean, buUm Petrum, and lacobtiin, and
lolianncm. lacobes brodor.

38 And hi comon on daps hcali

'

^

And he

liiis.
wcpeudc and geonunende.

geseah

myccl

.^

^

.,

39 And da he in-codc, he cwrel', Uvri
Nia

synd ge ge<lrefede, and wejial) ?
dis ma-den nil dead, ac heo 8la>{)|>.

40 Dil ta-ldon hi hine.

He da, eallum
ut-adrifenum, nam dies ma'denes [faMh-r
and] m(')der, and da de mid liim w.'iT<>n,
and inn-eodon suwiende, dar dn-t nja*Nli-n
wa*8.

41 Yidj fairi^rai]) l»i hnn<lau j»:ita ])arn,
qa|'uh <hi izai, TalriJ^a, kuiiui, |)att'i ist
giuskcirij), Muwilo, du |)U8 qi))a, urreis.

41 And hire han<l nam, an«l
Thalimtha. cunii, da't is on lire ;^
gereht, Madden, dc ic secge, oris.

42 Yah suns urrais so niawi, yali id-
dya ; was auk yerc twalibe. Yuh usgeis-
nudcdun faurlitein mikilai.

42 And heo sona aras, and eo<le

8o|>liee heo wirs twelf wintrc And calle
hi ^vund^edon mycelre wundninge,

43 Yali nnabau|> im filu, ei manna ni
giban

Yah haihait

)}ata.

izai

fuii{>i
mat van.

CiiAi". \\.

I Yah usstoj) yain^ro. yah
in huula si'inaninm ; yah laisti-

(|ani
dcdun afar iiiinia sijMinyoR i.s.

2 Yah bi|>c warj> sjibbato, dugnnn iu
Yah nianapii hnus-
H\vnag»»gc iaisyan.
yandans sildalcikidodun. qij^andans. \Vha-
)>ro Imtnnia jiat^i? yah who so hatidu'^cino
HO gibano ininia, ei mahteis swalcikos
)>airh handuus is wair))aud I

3 Nil!

|>at«

1

'

.*

Marvins. ib brnl
ludins yah
HwiMtry-UH w her at unsis.
idai wanrjiiin in |Miinnia.

S<

i

ist 8a tinirya, na sun us
ba vah lusi* vah
yah niu sind
Yah gamare-

*

*

.

'

4 (^a|» |»an im le.suH, potei nist prnufet-
UH unswerH, niba in pdiaurjrai seinai,
yah in gani|>yam, yali in gorda scinam-
11m.

43 And he him |>earlc bebea«l, da*t hi
hyt niinum men uc sscdon. And he het
hire etan syllan.

Chap. VI.

i And da he danun eode,
he fcrdc on his cdel ; and him folgoilon
liis leorning onihtn-H.

2 And gewtirdenum reste-da^ge, he on-
gan on gesamnunge la*ran. And man-
ege gehynlon and wundrtslon on his
hire, and cwjedon, Hwanon synd dys-
8um ealle d.is j^ingt and hwnl is sc
wisdom de him geseaUl is, and swyleo
mihta de jnirh
his handa gewonlene
synd ?

3 Hii nys [d)*s] se 8mi|>, Marian sunn,
lo-iejHS and ludo
lacobes brodtjr an«l
and Simonis )
hii ne synd his swutstni
her mid ust And da wunlon hi ge-
drefe*le.

4 Oa cwir)> sc Ilielend, S<))>Hcc nis n.in
witega buton wur|*scipe, biiton on his
edele^ and on his mseg)>e, and on his
husc

5 Yah ni muhta yainar aimthun mahte |

5 ^Vnd he nc mihtc dar snig ma^en

;

1

V. 37-VI- 5.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
37 And he resceyuede not ony man to
sue him, no but Petre, and James, and
John, the brother of James.

38 And thei camen in to the hous of
the prince of the synagoge. And he si^
noyse, and men wepinge and weilinge
moche.
39 And he gon yn, seith to hem, What
The
ben 5ee
wenche is not deed, but slepith.

troublid, and wepyn?

40 And thei scorneden him.

Forsothe
alle kast out, he takith the fadir and
modir of the wenche, and hem that
weren with him, and thei entren yn,
where the wenche lay.

41 And he holdinge the bond of the
wenche, seith to hir, Tabita, cumy, that
is interpretid,^ Wenche, to thee I seie,
rise thou.

42 And anon the wenche roos, and
walkide ; sothly she was of twelue 5eer.
And thei weren abaischt with greet
stoneyinge.

43 And he comaundide to hem greetly,
that no man schulde wite it. And he
comaundide to 3iue to hir for to ete.

TYNDALE, 1526.

191

37 And he suffred no man to folowe
hym, moo then Peter, and Janjes, and
Jhon, James brother.

38 And he cam vnto the housse of the
ruler ofi" the synagoge. And sawe the
wondrynge, and them that wepte and
wayled greatly.

39 And he went in, and sayde vnto
them, Why make ye this adoo, and
The mayden is not deed, but
wepe?
slepith.

40 And they lawght hym to scorne.
Then he put them all out, and toke the
father and the mother off the mayden,
and them that were with hym, and
entred in, where the mayden laye.

4

And toke the mayden by the honde,
and sayde vnto her, Tabitha, cumi, which
is by interpretacion, Mayden, I saye vnto
the, aryse.

42 And streight the mayden arose, and
went on her fete ; for she was of the
age of twelve yeres. And they were
astonied at it out of measure.

43 And he charged them straytely,
that no man shulde knowe off it. And
commaunded to geve her meate.

Chap. VI.

i And Jhesus gon out

thennis, wente in to his owne cuutree
and his disciplis folvviden him.

2 And the saboth maad, Jhesus bigan
for to teche in a synagoge. And manye
hecringe wondriden in
techinge,
seyinge, Of whennis to this alle these
thingis? and what is the wysdom that
is 3ouun to him, and suche vertues the
whiche ben maad by his bond ?

his

Chap. VI.

i And he departed thens,
and cam in to his awne countre ; and
his disciples folowed hym.

2 And when the saboth daye was come,
he began to teache in the synagoge. And
many tliatt horde hym were astonycd,
and sayde. From whens hath he these
thinges ? and what wysdom is this that
is geven vnto him, and suche vertues
that are wrought by his hondcs ?

3 Wher this is not a smyth,^ the sone
of Mario, tlic brother of James and
Josepli and Judas and Symound ? wher
and his sistris ben nat here with vs?
And thei weren sclauiidrid in him.

4 And Jhesus aeide to hem. For a pro-
pliete is not with outcn lionour, no but
in his owno cuntree, and in his liows,
and in his kyn.

5 And he my3te not make there ony

3 Ys not this that carpenter, Marys
Sonne, the ])r<)tljor off James and Josos
and Juda and Simon? and are not his
sisters here with vs ? And they were
hurt by the n'uson of him.
4 And JesuH sayde vnto them, A pro-
phet is not dcspysed but in his awne
countro, and aiiionge liis awne; kynno,
and amonge thoin that are of tlie same
llOUHslKtldo.

r, And lio couldc there sliewc no myra-

2
1

1

]\i2

rjoTiiic, 360.

AXaLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Makk

gntauyun, nibu fawiiiin siukaini liaiuluns

gala^'yanilH, ;^a)iaili(la.

6 Yuh Hildalrikida i'n uiigalaubeinais
hisunyaue,

wcilisa

bitaiili

Yali

izc.

wyrcan, huton feawa untninie, ou-iLBct-
tuin hiH handuin, he gelisrlde.

6 And he wundrmle for hcora unge-
leafan. He da la'rcnde da castc'l herci-dc.

luisyand.s.

7 Ytth athailmit )>ans twalif, yah dii-
gann iuh in-ijmilyuii twans whanzuh ; yah
gaf iiM waldufni aliinaiic unlirainyaize,

8 Yah faiirhauj) ini, ci wailjt iii ncm-

cina

"ill

wilt, niha hruu'tra

aina,

iiili

iiuif 11.:i1l'.

iiili hluif, iiili in LTiiinlns aiz,

7 And him twelfe to jfecl>'pode, and
ilgan 111 sendan twam and tw.Ini ; and
him anwcald sealde uncliL-nru ;;i>ta^

8 And him behead, da>t hi naht on
wege no namon, huton j,'yT"dc ane, ne
codd, ne hlaf, ne feuli (tii httmi 'jvi'llimi.

9 Ak ;^ni>k«»hai sulyoin, yuh ui wasyaij)

twaiin pa'uluni.

9 Ac gcsceodc mid cah uin. aii«l «la I hi

mid twam tunecum gescrydile na^'on.

10 Yah <|aj) «hi ini. j^iswliaduli |>ci piprj;-
aij) in gunl, |)ar salyai}>, untc usguggaij)

yain|>ro.

1

Yah 8wa niana^ai swe ni andnim-
aina 'izwis, iii liausyaiim 'izwis, us^^agg-

anciaiiH
|>o
iindaro fotuin izwaraim, ilu weitwo(li}>ai

ushrisyaij)

yaiii))n)

iiiuKla

10 And he cwaej* to him, Swa hwylc
hu8 swa ge in-gu|», wuniga|> dar, od
da't ge lit-gan.

1

And swi hwylee swa cow ne ge-
hyni|>, doniio ge dan<>n ut-g*i|> ri8««*at*a|>
(1;»'t «lust of eowniin fotum, him on ge-
witnesse.

A men (ji|;a izwis, siitizo

ist Saii-
'iin.
(launiyain ai|>|>aii Ciaiinuuiryani iu dagu
Btauos, |)au |)izai l>aurg yainui.

1

Yah usgaggandans, nieridedun, ei

12 And ut-gangende, hi bodeilon, d«t

idroigotledt'ina.

13 Yali unliul|>onfl manages usdrihun,
yali gtL<ial)M)il(>(hin alcwa managans siuk-
ans, yali galiailidcMhm.

14 Yah gahatisida

Ilcrodes,
Bwikuii)) allin war|> namo is, yuh (|a|>,
patri loliaiinis sa Oaupyaiids u
aim urrais, duj>}>f wain ky and |)ti>

|>iu(hins

'<

>

'

'in I'ninia.

15 An))arai jiaii

(|(>))un,

pati'i

llclias

int ; un)>arui }uiii <|c)niii, patci pruufctcs
wt, 8WC' ains |)ize |»nuifrto.

16 CialiaiiHyundM
ik

)mmmi'i

|>an,

HonHh^H (|a|),
afmaimuit,

pat4*i
Yoliannr, Mi ist tudi unniis us daii}>aim.

haulii|>

1 7 Sa auk raihtis Heroiles inHandyund.H,
galiahaida lohiuiiirn, yah galiand ma in
kiirkarai. in llairiNliadins, (|(iiai<^ Kilip-
|)au8, bro|>r8 scinis ; untc )m) guHugaithi.

hi dicd-l>ote dydon.

13 And hi manega deofo1-8eocnc«8a ut-
adrifon, and manega untnmic mid elc
smyredon, and geha?hh>n.

14 And dii gehyrde HeriHlcs 8C cyng,
d:et 8u|)licc his nama wh'H swiitol ge.
worden. am! lie
cw»'|>. Witotlliee loh-
annes se Fulluhtere of dea[»e ar.ij*, and
on him synd fordani nia'genu geworht.

15 Suine ewa'don. He is Eliiw ; 8ume
cwaulon, He is witega, swylce an of
dam >»ntcgum.

16 Da HeriKh'S dirt l

. he cwn»|»,
Sc lohunnes, de ic hi ..t ......mU', »e ariis
of dea|»e/

17

S6|>Ucc Hcro<lc« sonde, and het
'• ^m on cwirt«nie, for
hrinhir lafe,

lohannem.
«l;«Te
I'hilippus ; fordam dc he nam hi.

Her<-

his

ill.

'

18 Qa)> auk luhannr.Hdu IltHKla, patci
|>u«, hahan qeu hrol^m

ni skuUi ist

18 Da 8a?dc lohannes Hero<le, N}*8 de

alyfed, to ha>hbeuno dines hrtxter wif.

JHMniH.

19 Y|>

8()

]I(T(Mlia naiw inima, yali

wiKla imma usipman, yuh ni niahtit.

19 Da 8yrw«lc Herodias ^ttiIk' hinc,
and wolde h^nie ofslean, and hco ne
mihtc.

5
1

;

1

VI. 6-19-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

193

vevtu, no but heelide a fewe sike meiij
the hondis put to.

6 And he wondride for the vnbileue of
hem. And he wente aboute castelis in
enuyrown, techinge.

7 And he clepide twelue, and bigan
for to sende hem bi tweyne ; and 5af to
hem power of vnclene spiritis,

8 And comaundide hem, that thei
schulde not take ony thing in the weye,
no but a 3erd oonly, not a scrippe, not
bred, neither money in the girdil,

9 But schoon with sandalies,'*' and that
thei weren not clothid with tweie cootis.

10 And he seide to hem, AVhidir euere
5ee schulen entre in to an hous, dwelle
5e there, till ^e gon out thennis.

1

And who euere schulen not ressejiie,
ne heere 50U, 3e goynge out fro thennes
shake awey the powdre fro 50ure feet,
in to witnessinge to hem.

12 And thei goynge out, prechiden,

that men schulden do penaunce.

13 And thei castiden out many fendis,
and anoyntiden with oyle manye syke
men, and thei weren heelid.

14 And kyng Eroude hcrde, forsothe
his name was maad opyn, and he seide,
For Johne Baptist hath risun a^en fro
deed men, and therfore vertues worchen
in hym.

1

Sothely othere seiden, For it is Ely
but othere seiden. For it is a prophete,
as oon of prophetis.

16 The whiche thing herd, Eroude
scith. Whom I hauc bihedid, John, this
liath risun fro deed men.

17 Forsothe the iike Eroude scntc,
and held Joon, and bond him in to pri-
Boun, for Erodias, the wyf of Philip, his
brother; for he hadde weddid hir.

18 Sothly Johne seide to Eroude, It
is not Ifjcfful to thee, for to hane tlic
wyf of til i brother.

19 FnMlias forsothe Icido aspics to l»im,

and wolde sle him, and mi3te not.

cles, butt leyd his hondes apon a feawe
sicke foolke, and healed them.

6 And he merveyled at their vnbelefe.
And he went aboute by the tonnes that
lye in circuite, teachynge.

7 And he called the twelve, and began
to sende them two and two ; and gave
them power over vnclene spretes,

8 And commaunded them, that they
shulde take notthinge vnto their iorney,
save a rodde only, nether scrippe, nether
breed, nether mony in their pourses,

9 Butt shoulde be shood with sandals,
and that they shulde not put on two
coottes.

10 And sayd vnto them, Whersoever
ye entre into an housse, there abyde,
tyll ye departe thens.

1

And whosoever shall nott receave
you, nor heare 'you, when ye departe
thens shake of the duste that is vnder
youre fete, for a remembraunce vnto
them. I saye verely vnto you, itt shalbe
easyer for Zodom and Gomor att the
daye off iudgement, then for that cite.

12 And they went out, and preached,

that they shulde repent.

13 And they caste out many devylles,
and they annoynted many that were
sicke with oyle, and healed them.

14 And kynge Herode herde of him,
for his name was spreed abroade, and he
said, Jhon Baptiste is risen agayne from
deeth, and ther fore myracles worke in
hym.

T 5 Wother sayd. It

is Helyas ; and
some sayde. It is a prophet, or as won
of the prophettes.

16 But when Herode herde of him, ho
sayd. It is Jhon, whom I beheded, he
ys risen from dccth agayne.

17 For Herode him silfc had sent forth,
and had taken Jhon, and bounde him
and cast him into proson, for llcrodyas
sake, wliicli was hys l)n)t]icr Philippcs
wyfe ; for he had muricd her.

18 Jljon Hiiid vnto If erode, It is not
laufull for the, to have thy l)rothcrs
wyfe.

19 TTorodias lay<l waite for liim, and
wolde have killed him, butt she couldo
not.

lf>4

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Makk

20 Unte IlenMliH cilita sis lolmnncn,
kuiinaiuls iim 'svjiir pirailiUum yah weih-
Yah haiis-
nnu, yali
yaiuls nnnia, inaiiai; ^atawida, yah ga-
Imurvaha iintna andluiusithi.

witaidn

uiiina.

2 I Yah wauij)ans daj^H ^oitils, \mn Ilcrod-
is mehi galxiurjiais sciuaizos nahtainat
seinaizi', yah
•waurhta
|)UsuiKlifadiin, yah j^aiiii fruinistam CJal-
cilaias.

[lum inaistam

22

inn

Yali

at;;a;;pin(Uin

dauhtar
IIiTodiadins, yah j)linsyaii(k'in, yali ^a-
leikandein Ilcroda, yah )>aim nii|>ana-
kuinliyandaii), (|a}) {liiidans <hi JM/ai niau-
yai, liidci inik |)i.swhizuli j>t'i wilcis, yah
giba |>us.

23 Yah swor izai, patei JMswliah \>ei
l»i<lyai.s inik, ^iba jms, iiiul halba )>iud-
aii;^'ardya nu'ina.

24 \\>

si, usgaggaiidei, qa|> du ai|>ciii
I|) si ijajj, Ilaub-

Bcinai, Whis l»idyau ?
idis l(»haiini.s ))i.s Daiipyaudiiis.

20 So|>Hcc' IIcrcMles ontlrcd lohaiim-ni,
and wisto da-t he wa»8 rihtwis and halig,
And
antl he heold hine on cwertenje.
ho gehynie diet he fela wundra worhte,
and he lufeliee him hynle.

21 f)a 8C da»g cum Herode.s gebynl-
tide, he gegear^'ode mycele fconne )iis
oaldormannum, and dam fyrmestum on
Galiha.

22 And (la

tta da-re

1'

«n

dohtor inn-eode. and tuiid" ....
.Je
Herodc, and eallum dam de liim mid
to dam ma'dme,
sa'ton, se cing '
iJide me swu Iiu., ^ ....a dii wvUe, and ic
dc sylle.

..

23 And he swor hire, S6|>e8 ic dc
sylle, swa liwiet swa dii me bit^t, deah
dii wylle healf min rice.

24 l)d heo ut-eode, hco cwn^^ to liyre
Da c\vr;|) heo,

?

'

'

"

nu'der, Hwa»s 1
luhanncs hcafu'i

'

. ulhihtiTcs.

2f, ^ ah atL,ML:L,Mn(lii sunsaiw sniinuiin-
d<» du [)ainiua }>iuiiaiia,
ba}», (ji|andti,
Wilyau ei mis gibais ana lucsa haul^ij)
lohannis |)i.s I)auj)yandins.

26 Yali gaui*s waiir|»ans sa J'iudans 111
J>izc ai|>e, yah in |>izc n»i)anakuiubyaud-
auc ni wilda izui ufbrikan ;

25 Sona da heo mid oU>tr in to dam
cyninge code, lieo ba'd, ami dus cw;» [>,
Ic wylle diet dii me hnedlice on aimm
disce sylle lohannes heafod.

26 Dii wear|> se cyning ge-unret for-
dam a|>e, and fordam de him mid sajton
nolde deah hi ge-unretau ;

27 Yah suns insandyands sa )>iu(hins
ppaikulatur, anabauj* briggan liauln|> "is.
Ij) IS gahijiands afmaiinait iniina haubi))
in karkitrai,

a8 Yah atbar |>ata haubij) is ana mesa,
yali ati^iif ita |>izai niauyai, yah so niawi
utgaf ita ai|H'in si'inai.

29 Yah galiaUKyandans siponyos is,
qonmn, yah nsnrniun Icik w, yah ga-
lagidcdun ita in hlaiwa.

30 Yah ga'iddyrdun apaustauleis du
L'sna. yjih gataihnn inuna allata, yah
Bwa lilu Hwo gaUwidt{<lun,]

.

.

27 Ac sende a'nne cwellerc, and l»el»cad
da>t man his heafod on anum disco
And he hine da on cwerterne

1

•

'

1.

,.de,

28 And his heafod on disce brohtc.
and daa

hcji' '

*

'

•

and hit
ma'dcn hit -

29 Da his cnihtas da-t gehynlon, hi
comon, and his lie uamou, and hine ou
byrgene Irdon.

30 Soj'lice da da apoetolas togwilerc
eomou, hi cyddon dam Ha^lendc call,
diet hi dydon, and hi la^nlon.

31 And he Birdc him, Cuma)) and uton
; and us
giin on-sundron
hwun restan.
^a wa'ron
de comon. and tigm-hwyrfdon, and fyn»t
n:«f«lon da't hi wton.

*

*

32 And on sc}-]) st'gende, hi foron on-

sundron on wcstc stowe.

1

;

;

VI. 20-32.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

195

20 Sotlily Eroude drede John, witinge
him a iust man and hooly, and kepte
And liim herd, he dide many
bim.
thingis, and gladly herde hym,

20 For Herode feared Jhon, knowyno-e
that he was iuste and holy, and gave him
reverence. And when he herde him, he
did many thinges, and herde him gladly.

2

And whanne a couenable day hadde
fallun, Eroude in his birthe day made a
soupere to the princis, and tribunys,
and to the firste"*" of Galilee.

21 And when a convenyent daye was
come, Herode on hys birth daye made a
supper to the lordes, captayns, and chefe
estates of Galile.

22 And whanne the dou3ter of thilke
Erodias hadde entrid yn, and lepte, and
pleside to Eroude, and also to men rest-
ynge, the kyng seide to the wenche,
Axe thou of me what thou wolt, and I
schal 5yue to thee.

23 And he swoor to hir, For what
euere thou schalt axe, I schal 5yue to
thee, thou3 the half of my kyngdom.

24 The whiche, w^ianne sche hadde
gon out, seide to hir modir, What schal
I axe ? And she seide, The heed of John
Baptist.

25 And whanne she hadde entrid anon
with haste to the kyng, she axide, sey-
inge, I wole that anoon thou 5yue to me
in a dische the heed of John Baptist.

26 And the kyng was sory for the
ooth, and for men sittinge to gidere at
mete he wolde not hir be maad sory

27 But a manquellere sent, he co-
niaundide the heed of John Baptist for
to be brou3t. And he bihedide him in
the prison,

28 And brou^te his heed in a dische,
and 5af it to the wenche, and the wench
jaf to liir modir.

29 Tiie which thing herd, his disciplis
camen, and token his body, and puttiden
it in a buricl.

30 And apostlis comyngc to gidere to
Jh«.'su, toldcn to liym alio thingis, that
thei hadden don, and tau3t.

31 And lie scitli to liem, Come 30 by
50U seluc in to u desert place ; reste 30
Forsoth tlierc wercn manyc
a litcl.
that camcn, and wcntcn Ji3cn, and tliei
hadden not Hj)ace for to etc.
32 And thci Hti3ynge in to ]>oot, wenten
in to a desert place by hem selue.

2 2 And the doughter of the same Hero-
dias cam in, and daunsed, and pleased
Herode, and them that sate att bourde
also, then the kinge
sayd vnto the
mayden. Axe of me what thou wilt, and
I Avill geve it the.

23 And he sware vnto her, What soever
thou shalt axe of me, I will geve it the,
even vnto the one halfe of my kyngdom.
24 And she went forth, and sayde to
her mother. What shall I axe ? And she
sayde, Jhon Baptistes heed.

25 And she cam in streigth waye with
haste vnto the kinge, and axed, sayinge,
I wyll that thou geve me by and by in
a charger the heed of Jhon Baptist.

26 And the kinge was sorye, yet for
hys othes sake, and for their sakes which
sate att supper also he wolde not put
her besyde her purpost

27 And immediatly the kynge sent the
hangman, and commaunded his heed to
be brought in. And he went and be-
heeded him in the preson,

28 And brought his

a
charger, and gave hit to the mayden,
and the mayden gave it to her mother.

heedde in

29 When his discii)les herde of it, they
cam, and toke vppe his body, and put it
in a toumbe.

30 And the apostles gaddercd them
selves to gcddre to Jesus, and tolde him
all tliynges, booth what they had done,
and what they had taught.

31 And he sayd vnto them, Come ye
ai)arte in to the wyldernes ; and rest a
For there were many commers,
whyle.
and goers, and they had no leasur wons
for to eate.

32 And he went by sliippc, asydc out

oil" the waye into a desertt place.

U2

106

UOTUIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

33 And gcsawon hi farendc, and hi
pecneowon mane^ and pingcnde of
dam liurj^m, dydcr urnou, and him
bcfurnn comon.

34 And da sc Ilaflend danon co<le he
geseah mycclc mencj^, and he
ge-
miltsfxlc him, fordam dc hi wacrun swa
8wa Kcc'-p do nnnne h\Tde nabha|>. And
he on^an Iii fola la'ran.
35 And da hit myccl ylding wa»s, hia
leorning-cnihtaa him to comon, and
cwji'don, Oeos stow is wcste, and tima
is for|>-af(3in

;

36 Forlaet das manctni. iJa?t hi faron
on gehende tiiuas, and him mete hicgan
dajt hi cton.

37 Da cwa'j) he, Sylle pe liim etan.
i)ix cwaedon hi, Uton gjai and mid twam
hundred penegum hlafas bicgan, and wo
him etan sylhi)).

38 Da cwn»|> he, Hu fela hlafa hnf»bho
CJaji, antl lociaji. And da hi wiston,
ge ?
lii cwajdon, Hf hliifas, and twogcn fixiui.

39 And da behead sc Ha'lend, dat

diet folc snte ofer diet grene hig.

40 And hi da safton, hundreilum, and

fiftigum.

on*"

)ii

his

41 And fif hljifum, and twam fixum
Mj, he on hoofon l(*>oodo. atul
;.,;... I', and du hlafjts bnio, and
sealde
hi
toforan him nsctton. And twegen Bxaa
him eaUon d.TKle ;

leorning-cnihtum,

dn>t

42 Ami hi aUon da calle, and gefyllcde

wunU)n.

43 And hi nn-
liifa, twelf will..

*;ira hhifa, and fixa

44 S' '"

fif

|>uHcnd manna, dara

ctcudra

1

I,'

45 Da suna he nythlc his Icoming-
rnihtas on Rcyp stipin, daH hig him
beft'ran ftiron ofer da^ne nui|>an to Bcth-
saida, od he dn?t folc forlete.

46 And da he hi

forlct, he ferdc

1

;

;

1

VI. 33-46.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

33 And tliei sy5en hem goynge awey,
and manye knewen, and goynge on feet
fro alle citees, thei runnen to gidere
thidir, and came bifore hem.

34 And Jhesus goynge out sy3 moche
cumpanye, and hadde mercy on hem,
for thei weren as scheepe not hauynge
a shepherde. And he bigan for to teche
hem manye thingis.
35 And whanne moche our was maad
now, his disciplis camen ny^, sepnge,
This place is desert, and now the our
hath passid

36 Leeue hem, that thei goynge in to
the nexte townes or vilagis, bye to hem
metis whiche thei schulen ete.

37 And he answerynge seith to hem,
3yi-ie 5e to hem for to ete. And thei
seiden to hym, Goynge bye we loues
with two hundrid pens, and we scliulen
5yue to hem for to ete.

38 And he seith to hem, Hou many
And
loues han ^e? Go ^e, and se.
whanne thei hadden knowun, thei seien,
Fyue, and two fyschis.
39 And he comaundide to hem, that
thei schulden make alle men sitte to
mete aftir cumpenyes, vpon greene hey.
40 And thei saten down by parties, by

hundridis, and fyfties.

4

And the fyue looues taken, and two
fyschis, he biholdynge in to heuene,
blesside, and brak loouis, and ^af to his
dLsciplis, that thei schulden putte bifore
hem. And he departide two fyschis to
alle

42 And alle ceten, and weren fillid.

43 And thei token the

relyues of
broken mete, twelue coffyn.s full, and of
the fyschis.

44 Sothli thei that ceten, were fyue

thousynd of men.
45 And anon he constreyncdc his dis-
ciplis for to 8ti3e vp in to a boot, that
thei Hchiildcn ])aHSc bifore him (>U(;r the
see to iJcthsayda, the while he Icfte the
pcplc.

46 And whanne he hadde left hem, be

TYNDALE, 1526.

197
33 And the people spyed them when
they departed, and many knewe him,
and they hasted afote thether out of
every cite, and cam thyther before them,
and cam togedder vnto hym.
34 And Jesus went out and sawe moche
people, and had compassion on them, be
cause they were lyke shepe whych had
no sheppherde. Ajid he began to teache
them many thinges.

35 And when the daye was nowe farre
spent, his disciples cam vnto him, say-
inge, Thys ys a desert place, and nowe
the daye ys farre passed ;

36 Lett them departe, that they maye
goo in to the countrey rounde about
and in to the tonnes, and bye them
breed, for they have nothinge to eate.
37 He answered and saj^de vnto them,
And they sayde
Geve ye them to eate.
vnto hym. Shall we goo and bye ij. C.
penyworth of breed, and geve them to
eate?
38 He sayde vnto them, Howe many
And
loves have ye 1
when they had serched, they sayde, v.
and .ij. fysshes.
39 And he commaunded them, to make
them all sytt doune by companyes, apon
the grene grasse.

Goo, and loke.

40 And they sate doune here a rowe
and there arowe, by houndredes, and by
fyfties.

4

And he toke the v. loves, and the
.ij. fysshes, and loked vppe to heven,
and blest, and brake the loves, and gave
them to hys disciples, to put before
them. And the ij. fysshes he devyded
a monge them all ;
42 And they all ate, and were satis-

fycd.

43 And they toke vppe twelve basketes
full, off the gobbettes, and of the fysshes.

44 And they that ate, were about fyve

thousand men.

45 And strcyght waye he caused liys
disciples to goo into a shippe, and to
goo over the water ])eforc vnto ]>(th-
Haida, whill he sent awaye the people.

46 And as sone as he had sent them

198

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-bAXON, 995.

[St. Mahk

-

on done munt, and hinc
gebffHi.

una ilar

47 And da acfen wa», da?t scyp wn -;
on middre see, and bo ana was un
landc ;

48 And he geseah hi on rewettc swine
endc ; him wips
wind.
And on niht cnil>c da feor|>an wn-ccan,
he com to him ofer du sac gangcnde, and
wolde hi forbugan.

widcr-wcard

49 Da hi hinc jjc<»awon ofcr <!.*

.^

ganj^cnde, hi wrndon dat hit unfadc
ga«t Wtcrc, and hi clypcdon ;

50 Hi ealle hinc ^'csawon, and wiirdon
gcdrcfetlc. And soiia he spnic to him,
and cwae|>,
no
|)Urfon gc cow ondraedan.

Gelyfa|>,

ic hit

eora ;

51 And he on »cyj> to him eotle, and
8c wind geswac. And hi (\ks dc nil
bctwux him wundredon ;
52 Ne ongcton hi W dam hlafuni ;

86|>licc heora heortc wa?s ablcnd.

Vail iliiatsniwiin.

to Geneaarct, and dar wiecdon.

53 And da hi ofcr-8cjjle<h>n, hi comon

54 Yali us;jnijj,'un<lnin

itn

us skipn,

Bunsaiw ufkuiinaiulnns inn.

f,", r.irinnaiidaiis all ]>ata ;;a\vi, (Iulthii-
Iial)aii«lans

iiuii ana Imdyain jmuih ul)il
l)airnn, )>aclci ImusiiK-ilun oi is wcsi.

54 And da lii of scipc cmlon, sona hi
bine gccneowon.
— '

"

'

^•t rice 1
11 da Ui

ie. In 011
II, dar hi

h;<
bine gebyrdon.

.

|m<loi

iddyft

f,6 Yah JMRwlmduh

in
]iaim(»H ai|'|iaii baur^, ai|i|>au in \voilisn^
auii ^jn;,'^a lai^iilcdun siukans. yah l>e<lun
)>au Kkauta wastyos is attaitok-
ina, ci
einn; yah swn luanngni hwc altaitukuu
itnnm, j^^incHun.

56 And swzi bwar fwa he on wic oddo
on tiinas code, on Btnrton hi da un-
tnunan K'don, and bine
ba'don, da>t
hi bum his rcfcs fnail a't-briimn ; and
swa fcla swu hinc ict-hrinon, hi wurdon
hale.

CilAP. VII.

I Yiih pnqomun sik <lu
ininm, FiircMAtiieis ynh HUinni \>\rc bok-
iin

in.

'

I

'

'

onyo 18
iin)>wnhnnaini, matynndnn.s hInil>An8.

firnnminyaim handuni,

jmt-'iiit

- /.O Rip-

21^

CnAP. VII.

Pbari.Hci and ftumc
frnm HicniAalcm.

i^ Da comon to him,
IxSccras cumcndc

3 Anil da lii gcsawon sumc of his
Icorning-cnibtum bcsmitcnum handum,
11 handum, etan, hi
d.Tt is,
torMon hi

^..on,

1

3 ]f|»

Farcisaicw yali

allai

ludaieis,

3 Pharisci and callc ludcas ne eta|*,

;

VI. 47. -VII. 3] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

199

wente in to an liil, for to preie.

47 And wlianne euenyng was, the
boot was in the myddil see, and he
aloone in the lond j

48 And he sy^ hem trauelinge in row-
ynge ; sothli the wynd was contrarie to
hem. And aboute the fourthe waking
of the ny^t, he wandrynge on the see
cam to hem, and wolde passe hem.

49 And thei, as thei sy5en him wan-
drynge on the see, gessiden for to be a
fantum, and criedeu

50 Forsoth alle S}3en hym, and thei
weren disturblid. And anon he spak
with hem, and seide to hem, Triste ^e,
I am ; nyle 3e drede.

51 And he cam vp to hem in to the
boot, and the wynd ceesside. And thei
more wondriden with ynne hem ;

52 For thei vndirstoden not of the

looues ; sothli her herte was blyndid.

53 And whanne thei hadden passid
ouer the see, thei camen in to the lond
of Genazareth, and setten to londe.
54 And whanne thei hadden gon out

of the boot, anon thei knewen him.
55 And thei rennynge thur3 al that
cuntree, bigunnen to here aboute in
beddis hem that hadden hem yuele,
where thei lierden him be.

56 And whidur euere he entride yn to
vilagis and townes, or in to citees, thei
puttiden syke men in stretis, and prcie-
(len him, that thei schulden touche either
the hem of liis cloth ; and how manye
euere touchidcn him, wcren maad saf.

Chap. VII.

i And Pharisees and
summc of scribis comyngc fro Jerusa-
lem, canu'n to gidcro to liini.

2 And whanne thei hadden seyn summc
of his diHcij)li3 etc ])recd with comunc
hondis,^ tlici blamyden.

3 Forsoth Pliarisccs and allc Jcwis

L

awey, he departed into a mountaine to
praye.
47 And when even was come, the shippe
was in the myddes of the see, and he
alone on the londe ;
48 And he sawe them troubled in row-
inge ; for the wynde was contrary vnto
them. And aboute the fourth quartre
of the nyght, he cam vnto them walk-
inge apon the see, and wolde have passed
by them.
49 When they sawe him walkinge apon
the see, they supposed yt had bene a
sprete, and cryed oute ;

50 For they all sawe hym, and they
were a frayed. And a non he talked
with them, and sayde vnto them, Be of
good chere, it is I j be not afrayed.

51 And he went vnto them into the
And
shippe, and the wynde ceased.
they were sore amased in them selves
beyonde measure and marveyled ;

52 For they remembred nott off the
hertes were

cause

their

loves ;
blynded.

be

53 And they cam over, and went into
the londe off Genazareth, and drue vp
into the haven.
54 And as sone as they were come out
off' the shippe, streyght they knewe hym.
55 And ran forth through out all the
region rounde about, and began to cary
aboute in beeddcs all that were sicke,
when they herde tell that he was there.
56 And whither soever he entrcd into
the tonnes or cites, or vyllages, they
leyde their sicke in the stretes, and
prayed hyme, thatt they myght touche
and hit wer but the edge off' hys vesture
and as many as touched hym were safe.

CiiAP. VII.

I And the Phariscs cnm
to^^oddcr vnto hym, and dyvers off tlic
scril>cs whicli cam from Jerusalem.

2 And when they sawe ccrtayne of hys
di.sciplcs cate breed witli commcn haiidcs,
that is to sayc, with vnwcsHhou hondcs,
tliey complayned.

3 For the I'hariscs and all the Jcwcs,

200

nil

ti\ \v

Lubuii<

GOTUIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

M inat}uiiu,

IK".

hut on III hyra lianda gelomlice ))wcan,
htaMindc hira ylilnna trcsctnessa.

4 Yah uf ina|>la, nilm dauityuixl,

ni

Timtyand ; yah jin|>ar ist iiiaiia^,
|>utci
niuliu'iiiun (lu hulmn, <Iau]K>iiiiii8 stiklc,
yuh aiirkyc, yah katilc, yah ligi'c.

beon ; and mane;;a

4 And un Btrsctc, hi nc cta[). huton hi
tklrc
ge|>wc'genc
synd, dc him gesette s^Tid, tla't is ca-
licea fynn)>a, and ccaca, and urfata, and
nuestlinga.

5 |^a|>n>h jian frcliiin ina }>ai Fareisaieis
yali |»ai Imkaryos, I)uwhe |'ai siiK/iiyos
)>einai ni ^ni^^gand hi J'animci anafulhun
jtai Hinistaiis. aik un))wulianaim hunduiu
inatyanil Iiiaif ?

6 1\> 'is andhafyands qaj) du I'm, patei
>vaila in'aufotida Ksaias ]>i izwis, |'aiis
ist, So numa^'ei
liiitans, swe gann.'li|)
wairihini niik 8\vemi|>, 'i\> hairto izc fair-
ra hahai}> sik mis ;

1|) bwaro niik hh)tanil, hiisyandans

7

5 And da Bcsodon hinc Pharisci and
da boccras, liwi ne jja[) dine h'orning-
cnihtas a*ftor lire yldrcna ^'CM'tnysse, ac
besmiteuum handum h}Ta hluf )^icga|) ?

6 Da andswarodc he him, Wcl witcgode
Isaias be eow, licceteiiini. Hwa hit awrit-
en is, Di.s folc me mid wekrum \vcorJ>a|»,
s6j>lice hyra heortc is fcor fram me ;

7 On idel hi mc weor|'ia)>, and mannu

hiisuiiiins anahusuius inaiinc.

lara and bebodu la:ni|>.

8 Aflotnndans railitis anahusn Gul^s,
hahai|? ))at<'i anafulhun inaniians, dau]>-
einins aurkyo, yah stikle ; yah an|)ar
galeik swakikata nianag tauyij).

8 S "

pe for]irta|i Godcs MkmI,
.' manna lai^a. jnvrala ceaca,
and i
and c*ili('« ; and manega odre dyllicc
)>ing ge d6\>.

9 Yah (\a\> du im, Waila inwidi}) ana-
anafulhauo izwar

huHU Gups, ci

{uita

fantaiji.

10 >roses auk raihtis (|a|», Swerai attan
}>cinana yah ai|>('in JH'ina ; yah saci uhil
({i))ai attin scinannna ai|>|>au ai|)cin scinai,
dau))au afdau))yaidau.

11 I|>

}ai8 (ii|>it>, Vahai {\\\ta\ manna
attin Bcinamnia ai|>|mu aijn'in. Kaurhnn.
))atci ist, Mai)>ni8, ))i.swhah |>atc*i us mis
gabatnis ;

12 Yah ni ft

'

na ni wailit tiiuyail

attin hoinannn .

, di ai|Hin scinai,

,

13 ]Mau)iyandauH waurd Gu)>8

{>irai
anabuimai i/warai, jxu'i anafulhu)> ; ytUi
galeik swakikata nninag tauyij).

9 Da sa'de he him, ^Vel ge od idel
dydon Godes bclK>d, da?t ge eower lags
hculdon.

10 Moj-Bcs cwn[»J>, ^Vu^|la dinne fanler
ami dine nunlor ; and so de wyrig|> his
fuder and his mmlor, swell e »e dca)>e.

11 S6|>Hcc ge cweda|», Gif hwa sogj)
his fjeder and metier. C'orban. da't is on
lire ge|>code. (Jyfu i:if Invvlc is of mo,
dc frema|» ;

I 3 And ofer tl

|»ing don his fa.

'»

13 Toslitende Godes IhjIkkI for cower
stuntnn lage, de ge gcsctton ; and mane-
ga odre |>ing dyssuni gclicc ge d6|).

14 Yah athaitands alia )><) mnna^^cin,
qa|> iiu, lluusciji mis allai, yali fni|'yMi|v

1 4 And eft da manofju he him to
clyiHxle, and cwa*|', Gehynil^ mc ealle,
ami ongyta|>.

15 Ni waiht^ ist utji|>ro mnns inn^^agg-
ando in ina, )*atoi magi ina gnnniinyan ;

J.l \^'» nn" K»ng of dam men on hinc
gangendc, d«t bine bosmitan ma^gc ; ac

1

;

;

;
;

2

Yll. 4-15.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

201

eten not, no but thei waisschen ofte
lier hondis, holdinge the tradiciouns'''
of eldere men.

4 And thei turnynge a^en fro chepynge,
eten not, no but thei ben waischun
and manye othere thingis ben, that ben
takun to hem for to kepe, waischingis
of cuppis, and cruetis, and of vessels of
bras, and of beddis.

5 And Pharisees and scribis axiden
him, seyinge, AYhi gon not thi disciplis
aftir the tradicioun of eldere men, but
with comyne hondis thei eten bred ?

6 And he answeringe seide to hem,
Ysaie propheciede wel of 50U, ypocritis,
as it is writun. This peple worschipith
me with lippis, forsothe her herte is fer
fro me

7 In veyn trewli thei worschipen me,
teohinge doctrinys and preceptis of men.

8 Fprsoth 5e forsakinge the maunde-
ment of God, holden the tradiciouns of
men, waischingis of cruetis, and cuppis ;
and manye othere thingis lyke to thes
je don.

9 And he seide to hem, Wel ^e han
maad the maundement of God voyde,
that 3e kepe 3oure tradicioun.

10 Forsoth Moyses seide, Worschipe
thi fadir and thi modir ; and he that
schal curse fadir or modir, by deeth
deie he.

1

Sothli 3e seyen, If a man schal seye
to fadir or to modir, Corban, that is,
What euere 3ifte of me, schal profite to
thee

12 And oucr 3c suflfren not him do ony

thing to fadir or modir,

13 Brekyngc the word of God by

5oure tradicioun, that 30 han 3()uun
and 30 don manye othere suchc thingis.

14 And he cftsoonc clepinge to the
cumpanyc of peple, seide to hem, 3c alle
heere me, and vndiratonden.

15 No tiring with outen man is cntr-
inge in to him, tliat may dcfoulc him ;

excepte they waslie their handes ofte,
eate not, observinge the tradicions of
the seniours.

4 And when they come from the mar-
kett, except they washe them selves,
they eate not ; and many other thinges
there be, which they have taken apon
them to observe, as the wasshinge of
cuppes, and cruses, and of brasen vessels,
and of tables.
5 Then axed hym the Pharises and
scribes. Why walke not thy disciples
accordinge to the tradicions of the seni-
ours, butt eate breede with vnwesshen
hondes 1

6 He answered and sayde vnto them.
Well prophesied hath Esayas of you,
ypocrytes, as it is Avi'itten, This people
honoreth me with their lyppes, but their
hert is farre from me ;

7 In vayne they worshippe me, teach-
inge doctryns which are nothinge but
the commandementes off men.

8 For ye laye the commandement of
God aparte, and ye observe the tradi-
cions of men, as the wessinge off cruses,
and off cuppes ; and many other suche
lyke thinges ye do.

9 And he sayde vnto them, Well ye
putt awaye the commandement of God,
to mayntayne youre owne tradecions.

10 For Moses sayde, Honoure thy
father and thy mother ; and whosoever
sayeth evyll to his father or mother, let
hym dey for it.

11 But ye saye, A man shall saye to
his father or mother, Corban, that is.
Whatsoever thynge I offer, that same
doeth proffit the ;

1

And ye soffre no more that a man
do eny thynge for his father or mother,
13 And thus have ye made the com-
maundement off God off none cffccto
through youre awne tradicions, which
ye have ordeyncd ; and many sochc
thynges ye do.

14 And he called all the people vnto
liyni, and sayde vnto tliem, Jlcrkcn
vnto me cvQry one off you, and vndcr-
stondc.

15 Tlicre is no thynge with oult a
man, that can diffyle hyni, when hilt

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

ak }>atA n*
|>ata gani:>

mdo us nmnn, |)ata 'ist

I rtn jiinij rtc of dam men for|»-ga|>, d

• inannan.

liinc l>o.sinita|».

I

16 Yabai wlias hahai ausona hausyand-

16 Gif hwa earan haebbc, geldj-stc mc.

ona, ^hauflyai.

17 Yah |»an

pi1ai|» in pird, us |)i7Jii
manap'in, frehun ina sipunyos is bi |>o
gaj'ukon.

18 Yali qa}i rlu im, Swa yah jiis un-
wiUns siyujj ?
Ni fra|>yi|>, {^atntnei all
|>ata uta|>n> iniv^a;;<^ml() in niannan, ni
nia^ ina ;^aniainyan ?

17 And cti

Ilaclcnd fram djorc
m«iH'i:ii code, his leoming-cnilitas bine
an bi^'spel ncsodon.

8C

18 Da cwac|) he, And synd jje dus un-
;;1<'awo ? Nc onjjyte go, da?t call d.i't
litan c}*m|> on done man gangendo, nc
meg hine besmitan ?

19 Untc ni paloi|>i|> imnia in liairto,
ak in waniha, yah in un'unsa usgaggi|>,
gahrainei}> allans matins.

19 Fordam hit nc gR>|) on his heortan,
ac on his inno|>, and on f<»r|>-jaf«n» ge-
wite|>, eallc mettas claDusigcndi

20 Qa|>u|^-|>an.

patci

jiata us mann

20 Da saedc he him, T>wt da jiing do

usgaggando, )>ata ^'amainei|> mannan.

of dam men gi'»)», da bine l>csmita|>.

21

Inna}ro auk, us

niannc
mitoneis uhilos uspirjrrftntl, kalkinossyus,
horinassyus. nia»ir|ira,

liairtin

22

piul)ya,

unseleins,
liutoi, aj^daitci, anj]fo unscl, wayamcreins,
hauhhairtei, unwiti.

faihufrikcins,

2;^ j)<) alia ubilona innajiro usgacjgand,

yah ga;;aniainyand mannan.

24 Yuh yain|)ro usstandands, palai|> in
markos Twre yah Sti«l«)no.
Yah ga-
lei|>ands in pird. ni wiida witau muunan;
yah ni mahUi galaugnyan.

21 Innan, of manna hoortan }'fele ffc-
ftancas cuma|>, unriht-hscmedu, and fur-
if^eni, V
22 [St

_.: ....:^', man, facnu, sccam-
least, yfel gosih|), d}*8inessa, ofcr-nuKlig-

J

nessa^ stunt<«ci]»o.

23 Antl eallc das yfolu of dam innode

cuma|>, anil done man lK^n»ila|>.

24 Da ft'nle he danon on da endaa
And he in nLTan on
Tyri and Sidonis.
d.vt hiis, he noldc da't hit a'uig wi«te ;
and he nc miht€

hit bemij^an.

25 Ctahausyandci raihtis qinobi ina»
hahaida dauhUr ahman un-
ftizozci
irainyana, qimandei, draus du fotum is.

25 Sona da an wif, l>c him pehyrde,
dierc dohtor bipfde uncla*nno «:ast, hco
iu-eode, and to his fi'tum Iii tUtrehte.

26 Wa«u|>-[>an so qino ljai|>no, Saurini
Yah haji ina, ei

fwuikiska pil»aur|mi.
)>o unhul)H>n UHwaurpi us dauhtr izos.

26 S6|»lice d«t wif wies hirdrn. Siro-
An«l Untl hino, da-t lie

fenisces cynnes.
done deofol of hjrrc debtor adrifo.

27 \\> Yesus (]a|i du izai, Lot faurjiis
Bada wair|mn hania ; unto ni
jjoji igt
nintan lilaih luirne, yah wair]>an huiul-
am.

28 1)1

si andlmf imma, yah qa|'

«lu
i'mma, Yai, I'rauya ; yah auk hundos
umlaro hiutU matyand, af drauhsnom
harnc.

27 Da sa^de be hire, Lsct irrest da
1 dirt
.ndum

*"

'

beam beon
man nimed
worpc.

'

luo. and cwa^)-.
v.ir<».l(^
"^I'l^ ; wlfodhVo da hwcl|>-
eta|) under da^rc mysan, of dara

2X D>
I>rihton.
as
cilda rniman.

29 Yah qa|» du irai, In |»is waunlis
gagg, UAiddya unhul}>o us dauhtr |>cinai.

29 Da sicdo he byre, For diere spra'oc

ga, mi »c deofol of diure debtor gcwit

7

6
1

VII. 16-29.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

203

but tho thingis that comeii forth of man,
tho it ben that defoulen a man.

16 Forsoth if ony man haue eeris of

heeringe, heere he.

1

And whanne he hadde entrid in to
an hous, fro the cumpany of peple, his
disciplis axiden him the parable.

18 And he seith to hem, So and 5e ben
Vndirstonden ^e not, for
vnprudent.'''
al thing withoute forth entringe in to
a man, may not defoule him ?

19 For it hath not entrid into his
herte, but in to the wombe, and bynethe
it goth out, purgynge alle metis.

20 Sothli he seide, For the thingis
that gon out of a man, tho defoulen a
man.

21 Forsoth fro withynne, of the herte
of men comen forth yuele thou3tis, auou-
ti-ies, fornicaciouns, mansleyngis,

entreth in to hym ; but thoo thynges
which procede out of a man are those
which defyle a man.

1

Yf eny man have eares to heare, let

hym heare.

17 And when he cam into a housse,
awaye from the people, his disciples axed
him of the similitude.

18 And he sayd vnto them, Do ye then
lacke vnderstondinge ? Do ye not yet
perceave, that whatsoever thinge fi'om
with out entreth into a man, hit can
not defyle hym ^

19 Be cause hit entrith not into his
hert, but into the belly, and goeth out
into the draught, that porgeth oute all
meates.

20 And he sayde. That defileth a man,

whiche cometh oute of a man.

2

For from -within, even oute off the
herte off men proceade evyll thoughtes,
advoutry, fornicacion, murder,

22 Theftis,

wickidnesses,
gyle, vnchastite, yuel y3e, blasphemyes,
pride, folye.

couetises,'''

22

Theeft,

coveteousnes, wickednes,
diceyte, vnclennes, and a wicked eye,
blasphemy, pryde, folisshnes.

23 Alle thes yuelis fro withynne comen

23 All these evyll thynges com from

forth, and defoulen a man.

24 And Jhesus risynge thennis, wente
in to the endes of Tyre and Sidon. And
he gon in to an hows, wolde no man
wite ; and he mi3te not dare.^

25 Sothli a womman, anon as sche
lierde of him, which wommanis dou^tir
liadde an vnclene spirit, entride, and fel
doun at his feet.

26 Sothli the womman was hcthene,
of the generacioun of Sirefen. And she
preide him, that he wolde caste out a
(Icuel fro liir (lou3tir.

27 The which seidc to liir, Suffrc thou
it is not good
the soncs be fulfild first ;
to take the bred ot soncs, and sendc to
houndis.

28 And she answcridc, and scido to him,
Forsotlic, Lord ; for whi and litlc welpis
etcn vndir tlic bord, of the crummcs of
'hildron.

29 And Jlicsus flcitli to liir, For this
word go, the fend is went out of tlii
d()U3tir.

with in, and defile a man.

24 And from thence he rose, and went
into the borders off Tire and Sidon.
And entred into an housse, and wolde
that no man shulde have knowen off
hym ; butt he culde nott be hid.

25 For a

certayne woman, whose
doughter had a foule sprete, when she
herde off hym, cam, and fell doune att
hys fete.

26 The woman was a grekc, out off
Sirophenicia. And she besought hym,
that he wolde caste out the devyll out
off' her doughter.

27 Jesus sayde vnto her, Lett the
chyldrcn fyrst be feed ; it ys nott meto
to take the chyldrcMis breed, and to
caste itt vnto whelppcs.

28 She answered, and sayde vnto hym,
Even soo, Master ;
ncvcrthclesse the
whelppcs also catc vndcr the table, off
the cliyldrons oromes.

29 And he suydc vnto her, For thys
sayinge goo tliy wayc, the devyll ys gon
out off thy doughter.

;

204

GOTHIC, 360.

30 Yah galei})anclci du gartla sciiiam-
nia, bigat iinhul[jon usgaggana, yah \>o
dauhtar ligaudeiii ana ligra.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
30 And da heo on hyre bus code, heo
gemette dset maeden on hire bedde
licgende, and done deofol ut-gun,'''

[St. Mark

31 Yah aftra galeij^ands af markora
Twre yah Seidone, qam at marein Ga-
IciUiie, mij) tweihiiaim markom Daika-
paulaios.

3 2 Yah berun du "imma baudaua stam-
niana, yah bedun iua, ei lagidedi imma
handau.

31 And eft he code of TjTa gcmscrum,
and com j)urh Sidonem to doere GaHleisc-
an sae, betwux midde endas Decapoleos.

32 And hi laeddon him senne dcafne
and dumbne, and bine baedon, dait he
his hand him on asette.

33 Yah afnimands 'ina af managein
suiidro, lajjida fi":o:rans seinans in ausona
imma; yah spe wands attaitok tuggon is.

33 Da nam he hine onsundran of drere
menigu, and his fingras on his earan
dyde ; and spaetende his tungan onhrun.

34 Yah ussaiwhands du himina, ga-
swogida, yah qaj) du imma, Aiffa})a,
))atei ist, Usluku,
35 Yah sunsaiw usluknodcdun imma
hliumans, yah andbundnoda baudi tugg-
ons is, yah rodida raihtaba.

36 Yah anabau)) im, ei mann ni qc)j-
is ira anabauj), mais

eina ; whan filu
])amma cis meridedun,

34 And on done heofon beheaUlende,
geomrode, and cwsej), Effeta, dait is on
lire ge|>eode, Sy dii ontyned,

35 And sona ^vurdon his earan ge-
openode, and his tungan bend wcar|>
unslyped, and he rihte spra^c,

36 And he bead him, diet hi hit nanum
s6|)Hce swa lie him

men ne saedon;
swidor behead, swa hi swidor bodedon,

37 Yah ufarassau sildalcikidedun, qi|)-
andans, Waila allata
yah
baudans gatauyi)? gahausyan, yah un-
rodyandans rodyan.

gatawida,

37 And daes de ma "NVTindredon, and
cwaedon, Ealle ]>mg he wcl dyde, and he
dyde daet deafe gehyrdon, and dumbe
spraecon.

at

CiiAP. VIII.

I in yainaim j>an dag-
am, aftra
filu managai managein
wisandein, yah ni habandam wha raati-
dedeina, athaitands siponyans, qajmh du
im,

CiiAP. VIII.

I ^ Eft on dam dagum,
him WtTS mid micel menigu, and na^fdon
hwaet hi aeton, da cwsej) he, to sonmc
geclypedum his leorning-cnihtum,

2 Infeinoda du |>izai managein, unte
yu dagans }jrins mij) mis wesun, yah ni
haband wha matyaina

2 Ic gemiltsige dysse menegu, fordam
hi \nj dagas me ge-aubidia|i, and nabbaj>
hwajt hi eton ;

3 Yah yabai fralcta ins lausqi)'rnns du
sumai

gar(hi ize, ufligand ana wiga ;
raihtis izc fairrajjro qemun.

3 Gif ic hi fa?stcnde to hjTa Imsum
IcTte, be wegc hi gcteorigca^ ; sumc hi
comon feorran.

4 Yah andhofun imma siponyos is,
'Whaj)ro J'ans mag whas gaso})yau hlaib-
am ana au])idai 1

5 Yali frah ins, "Whan managans habaij)

blaibans ?

Ij) cis qcj>un, Sibun.

4 And da andswarodon him his leorn-
ing-cnihtas, llwanon moeg acnig man
diis mid hlafum on disum westene ge-
fyllan ?
5 Da axode he hi, Hu fela hlafa hjebbe
gc ?

Hi cwaedon, Seofon.

;

;

VII. 30.-VIII. 5] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
30 And whanne she hadde gon hom,
she fond the wenche sittinge on the
bedd, and the deuel gon out fro hir.

31 And eftsoone Jhesus goynge out
fro the endis''' of Tire, cam thur3 Sidon
to the see of Galilee, that is bitwixe the
myddil endis of Decapoleos.

32 And thei leeden to him a deef man
and dourab, and preiedeu him, that he
putte to him the bond.

33 And he takynge him asydis fro the
cumpanye, sente bis fyngris in to bis
litle eeris ; and spetinge towcbide bis
tunge.
34 And he biholdynge in to heuene,
sorwide withynne, and seith, Effeta, that
is, Be thou openyd,

35 And anon bis eeris weren openyd,
and the bond of bis tunge is unbounden,
and be spak ri3tly.

^6 And he comaundide to hem, that
thei schulden seye to no man ; forsotb
how moche he comaundide to hem, so
moche more thei precbiden more,

37 And by that the more thei won-
driden, seyinge, He dide wel alle thingis,
and deef men be made to heere, and
doumbe for to speke.

TYNDALE, 1526.

205
30 And when she was come home to
her housse, she founde the devyll de-
parted, and her dougbter lyinge on the
beed.

31 And be departed agayne from the
coostes off Tyre and Sydon, and cam
vnto the see off Galile,tbrowe the myddes
off the coostes off the .x. cites.
32 And they brought vnto him won
that was deffe and stambred in bys
speche, and prayde hym, to laye bys
honde apon hym.
33 And be toke hym a syde from the
people, and putt bys fyngers in bys
eares ; and did spet and touched bis
tounge.
34 And loked vp to beven, and sygbed,
and sayde vnto hym, Ephatba, that ys
to saye. Be openned,
35 And streyght waye bys eares were
openned, and the stringe off bys tounge
was loosed, and he spake playne.

36 And he commaunded them, that
they sbulde tell no man ; butt the more
be forbad them, soo moche the more a
greate deale they pubblessed it,
37 And were beyonde measure astonyed,
sayinge. He bath done all tbinges well,
and bath made booth the deffe to beare,
and the dom to speake.

Chap. VIII.

i In tho dayes, whanne
moche cumpenye of peple was with Jhe-
Bu, and hadde not what thei scliulden
ete, bis discipHs gaderid to gidere, he
seith to hem,

2 I haue rewthe on the cumpanye of
pcplc, for loo ! now the thridde day
thei susteynen^ me, and ban not what
tliei schulen etc

3 And if I Iceue hem fastinge in to
her hous, thei schulen failc in the weyc
forsothe summe of hem camen fro fcr.

4 And discipHs answcriden to him,
Whorof a man schul niowe fiUe hem
with looucs here in wildirncssc i

CiiAP. VIII.

I In those dayes, when
there was a very greate companye, and
had notbinge to eate, Jesus called bys
disciples to hym, and sayd vnto them,

2 My berte mcltetb on this people, be
cause they have nowe bene wyth me iij.
dayes, and have notbinge to eate j

3 And yf I sbulde sonde them awayo
fastinge to their awne bouses, they sliuldc
faynt by the waye ; for dyvcrs of theni
cam from farre.

4 And bys disciples answered hym,
From whence myght a man suffyse them
with Ijrccd here in the wyldcrnes 1

5 And he axide hem, TIow mnnyc looucs

ban 3c 1 The whichc seidcn, Scucnc.

5 And he axed them, Tfowe many loves

have ye 1 They sayde, Seven.

1

206

7
1

;

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

6 Yah anabau}j };izai managein ana-
kumbyan ana air})ai. Yah nimands jjaus
sibun hlaibans, yah awiliudoiids, gabrak,
yah atgaf siponyam scuiaim, ei atlagi-
Yah atlagidedun faur \>o
dedeina faur.
managein.

7 Yah habaidedun fiskans fawans ; yah
)jans ga))iu|>yands, qa]> ei atlagidedeina
yah |>ans.

8 Ganiatidcdun |)an, yah sadai waur|nin ;
sibun

gabruko,

laibos

yah usneniim
spwrcidans.

6 Da het he sittan da menegu ofer da
corjjan. And nam da seofon hlafas, and
Gode jmncodc, and hi bra^c, and sealde
hi toforan
his leorning-enihtum, dait
him asetton. And hi swa dydon.

7 And hi nosfdon buton feawa fixa

and he da bletsode, and het beforan him
settan.

8 And hi seton, and wurdon gefyllede ;
and hi namon dajt of dam brytsenum
belaf, seofon M'ilian fulle.

9 "\Vcsunu|)-|)an

|)ai matyandans, swc

9 S6))lice da de dar aeton, wacron fif

fidwor jjusuudyos ; yah fralailot ins.

J)useud 3 and he hi da forlet.

10 Yah galaij) sunsaiw "in skip, mi})
siponyam seinaim, yah qam ana feia
Maiidalan.

1

Yah urrunnun Fareisaicis, yah du-
gunnun mi|)Sokyan imma, sokyandans du
imma taikn us himina, fraisandans i'na.

10 And sona he on scyp, mid his
leorning-enihtum, astah, and com on
da dselas Dalmanu|)a.

1

And da ferdon da Pharisei, and
ongunnon mid him snieagean, and tacen
of heofone sohton, and his fandedon.

12 Yah ufswogyands ahmin seinamma,
qaj), Wha ))ata
sokei[; 1
Amen qi))a izwis, yabai gibaidau kunya
|)amma taikne.

kuni taikn

12 Da cwre)) he, geomriende on his
gaste, Hwi secj) deos cneoris tacen ]
dissc
Soj^lice
cneorisse tacen geseald.

ic cow seege, ue bij)

13 Yah afletands "ins, galeil^ands aftra

13 And hi da forlectende, eft on scyp

in skip, uslaij) hindar marein.

astah, and ferde ofer done mu|)an.

14 Yah ufarmunnodcdun niman hlaib-
ans, yah niba ainana hlaif ni habai(,ledun
mi)> sis in skipa.

15 Yah anabauj) im, qijjands, Saiwhi[),
ei atsaiwhi|> izwis })is beistis Furcisuie,
yah beistis Herodis.

14 And hi ofergeton da^t hi hlafas ne
nrimon, and hi na^fdon on scy})c mid
him biiton ivnne hlaf.

15 And he him bead, and cwa}|>, Lociaji,
and warniaj) fram Pharisea, and Ilerodes
hiefe.

16 Yah |)ahte(Uin mi|) sis misso, qij)-

16 Da bohton hi betwux him, and

andans, Unte hhubans ni habam.

CWtcdon, Niebbe we nane hlafas.

17 Yah frajjyands lesus, qa)) (hi

Wha |)aggkei|', unto hlaibans ni habai|i'/
Ni nauh fra|)yij), nih wituj) ; unte daub-
ata habai)> hairto izwar.

iin,

1

Da sc Ilajlcnd dait wiste, he cwa^)>,
Hwa^t j>ence ge, fordam ge hlafas nab-
oncnawaj), ne ne
ba|> ?
ongyta}) ; gyt ge habba)) eowre heortau
gebleude.

Gyt ge ne

18 Augona habandans, ni

gasaiwliil',
yah ausona liabandans, ni gahausei}) ;
yah ni ganuniu]),

19 J>an |)ans fimf lilaibans gabrak fimf
managos tainyons
Qcjiun du

jnisundyoin,
fullos gabruko usnenmj) ?
imma, Twalif.

\vhan

18 Eagan ge ]iabba|>, and ne geseo)>,
and caran, and ne gehyraj) ; ne ge ne

Jjcnca}^,

19 Hwfonne ic bra^c fif hlafas and
twegen fixas, and hu fela wyligena ge
namon fulle 1

Hi cwa?don da, Twelfe.

20 A]>))au

j)an

}^ans sibun hlaibans

20 And hwsenne seofon hlafas feower

3
6
1

1

VIII. 6-20.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

207

6 And he comaundide the cumpanye
And he
to sitt doun on the erthe.
looues, and doynge
takynge
thankynges, brak, and ^af to his dis-
cipb's, that thei schulden putte forth.
And thei setten forth to the cumpany.

seuene

7 And thei hadden a fewe smale fischis ;
and he blesside hem, and comaundide
for to be put forth.

8 And thei eeten, and ben fulfild ; and
thei token vp that lefte of relyf,^ seuene
leepis.

9 Forsoth thei that eeten, weren as
foure thousand of men j and he lefte
hem.

10 And anon he wente vp in to a
hoot, with liis disciplis, and cam in to
the partis of Dalmamytha.

1

And Pharisees wenten out, and bi-
gunnen to seke^ with liim, axynge a
tokene of hym fro heuene, temptinge
bym.

12 And he sorwynge withynne in
spirit, seith. What sekith this genera-
cioun a tokene?
Treuly I seie to 50U,
if a tokene schal be ^ouun to this gene-
racioun.

1

And he leeuynge hem, wente vp
eftsoone in to a boot, and wente ouer
the see.

14 And thei for5aten to take breed,
and thei hadden not with hem no but o
loof in the boot.

15 And he comaundide to hem, scy-
inge, Se 30, and be 56 war of the sour-
dow3 of Pharisees, and sourdow3 of
Eroude.

1

And tliei thou3ten oon to another,

sciynge, For we haii not breed.

17 Tlie which thing knowun, Jhesus
seith to hem. What thenke 3e, for 30
3'^ 3e knowcn not, ne
han not breed ?
vndirstonden ;
3it 30 liau 3oure lierte
blyndid.

18 3^ hauynge y3en, seen not, and 3c
liauyngc eeris, heeren not ; nether 3e
han mynde,

19 Wliannc T })rak fyue looues in to
fme tliousande, and liou manye coffyns
ful of l)rokenc mete 30 token vp ?
Tliei
seyn to liini, Twelue.

20 Whanne and seuene looues in to

I

6 And he commaunded the people to
sitt doune on the grounde. And he toke
the .vii. loves, gave thankes, brake, and
gave to hys disciples, to set before them.
And they sett them before the people.

7 And they had a feawe smale fysshes ;
and he blessed them, and commaunded
them also to be sett before them.

8 They ate, and were sufFysed ; and
they toke vp off the broken meate that
was lefte, vij. basketes full.

9 They that ate, were in nomber aboute
fowre thousandt ; and he sent them
awaye.

10 And a non he toke shippe, whith
his disciples, and cam in to the parties
of Dalmanutha.

1

And the Pharises cam forth, and
began to dispute whith hym, and sought
of hym a signe from heven, temptinge
him.

12 And he syghed in his sprete, and
sayde, Why doth thys generacion seke
a signe 1 Verely I saye vnto you, there
shall no signe be geven vnto thys gene-
racion.

13 And he lefte them, and went into
the shippe agayne, and departed over
the water.

14 And they had forgotten to take
breed with them, nether had they in the
shippe with them more then one loofe.

15 And he charged them, sayinge,
Take hede, be ware of the leven of the
Pharises, and the leven of Herode.

16 And they reasoned amonge them

selves, saynge, We have no breed.

17 And when Jesus knewe tbat, lie
sayde vnto them, Why take ye thouglit,
be cause ye have no bread 1
Perccave
ye not yet, nether vnderstonde ;
ye youre herttes yett blynded 1

liy.ve

18 Have ye eyes, and se nott, and liavo
do ye nott

ye cares, and heare not ;
remember 1

19 Wlicn T l)rake v. loves a monge .v.
M. men, liowe many baskettcs full of
broken meate toke ye vpi)1 They sayde
vnto iiini .xij.

20 When \ brake vij a monge iiij M.

;

208

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995. [St. Mark

fidwor )msiindyom,whan manngans spwr-
eidans fullans gabruko usnemu}> 1
cis qe|)un, Sibun.

I|)

21 Yah qaj) du im, Whaiwa ni nauli

fraj)yi}? 1

J>usendum, and liu fela wyligena brytsena
ge namon fulle ]

Hi saedon, Seofon.

21 Da saede he him, Hwi ne ongyte

gegytr

22 Yah qcmun "in Bej'ani'in, yah berun
du i'mma blindan, yah bedun ina, ei
'inima attaitoki.

22 And hi comon da to Bethzaida, and
hi brohton him da ajnne blindne, and
hine baedon, daet he hine a^t-hriiie.

23 Yali fairgreipands handu })is blind-
ins, iistauh ina utana weihsis, yali speiw-
ands in augona is, atlagyands ana hand-
uus seinos, frah ina, gau wha sewhi.

24 Yah ussaiwhands, qa|?, Gasaiwha
mans ))atei swe bagmans gasaiwha gagg-
andans.

25 pa|>roh aftra galagida handuns ana
j^o augona is, yah gatawida ina ussaiwh-
an, yah aftragasati]js war)>, yah gasawh
bairhtaba alhxns.

26 Yah insandida 'ina du garda is,
qiJMnds, Ni in ))ata weihs gaggais ; ni
niannhun qi];ais, in j^amina wehsa.

23 And da set-hran he d?es blindan
hand, and leedde hine butan da wie, and
spsette on his eagan, and his hand on-
asette, and hine axode, hwaeder he aht
gesawe.

24 Da cwoej) he da, da he hyne beseah,

Ic geseo men swylce treow gangende.

25 Eft he asette his handa ofer his
eagan, and he gcseah da, and wearj)
geedniwod, swa dset he beorhtlice eall
geseah.

26 Da sende he hyne to his husc, and
cwje]), Ga to dinum huse ; and deah
ga, naencguni du hit ne
dii on tiiii

sege.'''

27. Yali usiddya lesus yah siponyos is
in wehsa Kaisarias |)izos Filippaus. Yah
ana wiga frah siponyans seinans, qij)ands
du im, Whana mik qijjand mans wisan 1

27 Da eode he and his leorning-cnih-
tas on daet castel Cesareoe Philippi. And
he on wege his leorning-cnihtas ahsode,
Hwset secga}) men daet ic sy 1

28 Ijj

eis andhofun, lohannen j^ana
Daupyand ; yah an})arai, Helian ; sum-
aih |)an, ainana praufete.

28 Dix andswarodon hi, Sumc, lohan-
sunie, Hcliam ;

nem done Fulluhtere ;
sume, suinne of dam witcgum.

29 Yah is qa|> du im, A})|)an yus whana
[>an

mik qi|>i|j
Paitrus, qa}) du imma, pu is Christus.

Andiiafyands

wisan ?

29 Da cwre|> he, Hwajt sccge ge da^t ic
sy ) Da andswarode Petrus him, and
cwa3)), Dii cart Crist.

30 Yah faurbauj) im, ci mannhun ni

30 And da bead he him, da?t hi nrcn-

qcj)cina bi ina.

31 Yah dugann laisyan ins, j^atei skal
sunus mans filii winnan, yah uskiusan
skulds ist frani J)aiin sinistain, yah )>aim
auhuniistam gudyam, yah bokaryam,
yah us([iman, yah afar
prins dagans
usstandan.

32 Yah swikunjiaba j'ata waurd rodida.
Paitrus, dugann

Yah aftiuhands ina
andbcMtan ina.

33 l)j is gawandyands sik, yah gasaiwh-
|nin3 siponyans seinans, andbait

ands

ecfum be him ne sjvdon.

31 Da ongan he hi laeran, da^t manncs
sunu gcbyrej) fela j'inga j^olian, and boon
aworpen fram ealdormannum, and hcah-
saccrdum, and bocerum, and bcon of-
slegen, and ajfter })rim dagum arisan.

32 And sprnec da openlicc. And da
nam Petrus hine,
hine
}>reagcan.

ongan

and

33 Da bewende he hine, and cidde
Petre, and cwa^j), Ga onbtec, Satanas

1

1

VIII. 21-33] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

209

four tliousande of men, how many leepis
of brokene mete ^e token vp ? And tliei
seyen, Seuene.

2

And he seide to hem, How yndir-

stonden 5e not 3it 1

22 And thei comen to Bethsayda, and
thei bryngen to him a blynd man, and
preieden hym, that he schulde touche
him.

23 And the bond of the blynd man
takun, he ledde him out of the streete,
and spetynge in to his y3en, his hondis
put to, he axide him, it he sy5 ony
thing.

24 And he biholdinge, seith, I se men

as trees walkynge.

25

Aftirward

eftsoones he puttide
hondis on his y3en, and he bigan for to
se, and he is restorid, so that he sy^
clerely alle thingis.

26 And he sente him in to his hous,
8e}inge, Go in to thi hous ; and if thou
schalt go in to the streete, seye to no
man.

27 And Jhesus entride yn and his dis-
ciplis in to the castels of Sezarie of
Philip. And in the weye he axide his
disciplis, seiynge to hem, Whom seyn
men me for to be ?

28 The whiche answeriden to hym,
seiynge, Summe, John Baptist ; othere
seyn, Helye ; but othere seyn, as oon
of the prophetis.

29 Thanne he seith to hem. But whom
seye ^e me for to be 1 Petre answeringe,
seith to him, Thou ert Crist.

30 And he thretenyde hem, that thei

schulden nat scie to ony man of him.

3

And he bigan for to teche hem, for
it bihoueth mannis sone suffre manye
thingis, and to be reproued of the hi^este
prestis, and of eldere men, and 8cri})is,
and to be slayn, and aftir thre dayes,
for to rise a3en.

howe many baskettes of the levinges of
broken meate toke ye vp 1 They sayde,
vij.

2 1 And he sayde vnto them, Howe is

it that ye vnderstonde not 1

2 2 And he cam to Bethsayda, and they
brought a blynde man vnto him, and
desyred hym, to touche him.

23 And he caught the blinde by the
honde, and ledd hym out off the toune,
and spat in hys eyes, and put hys hondes
apon hym, and axed him, yf he sawe
eny thinge.

24 And he loked vp, and sayde, I se
men, for I se them walke as they were
trees.

25 After that he put his hondes agayne
apon his eyes, and made hym see, and
he was restored to his sight, and sawe
every man clerly.

26 And he sent hym home to his awne
the

housse, sayinge, Nether go into
toune, nor tell it to eny in the toune.

27 And Jesus went out and his dis-
ciples into the tounes that longe to the
cite called Cesarea Philippi. And by
the waye he axed his disciples, sayinge.
Whom do men saye that Y am "?

28 They answered. Some saye, that
thou arte Jhon Baptiste ; some saye,
Helyas j and some, one off the pro-
phetes.

29 And he sayde unto them, But whom
saye ye that I am ?
Peter answered,
and sayd vnto hym. Thou arte very
Christe.

30 And he charged them, that they

shulde tell no man off it.

31 And he began to declare vnto
them, howe that the sonne of man nmste
suffre many thyngcs, and shulde be re-
proved off the scniours, and off the
hye prestes, and scrybcs, and shulde be
arysc
kylled,
agayne.

and after

dayes,

thre

32 And he spak playnli the word.
And I'etro takyngo him, bygaii for to
blame him.

33 The which tumyd, fleyngc his dis-
ciplis, manaside Petre, seiynge, Go aftir

32 And he spake that sayinge openly.
And IV'tcr toke hym a syde, and began
to chydc liyin.
33 FIc tourned aboutc, and lokcd on
his disciples, and rebuked Peter, ssiyinge,

r

210

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

Paitru, qi))ancls, Gagg hindar mik, Sat-
ana; uiite ni frajjyis |)aim Gu})S, ak |)aiin
manne.

34 Yah athaitands ]>o managcin, mi)?
siponyam seinaim, qa]j du im, Saei will
afar mis laistyan, inwidai sik silban, yah
nimai galgan seinana, yah laistyai niik.

35 Saci alHs will saiwala seina ga-
nasyan, fraqisteij) 'izai ;
i'}? saei fraqistei})
saiwalai scinai in meina yah in j^izos
aiwaggelyons, ganasyi)? |)0.

36 Wha auk boteijj man nan, yabai
gageigaij? ))ana fairwhu allana, yah ga-
slci]>ei|? sik saiwalai seinai ?

37 Aij^ljau wha gibi}? manna inmaidein

saiwalos scinai zos 'i

38 Unte saci skamai]? sik meina, yah
wam'de meinaize "in gabaur|>ai |)izai hor-
inondein yah frawaurhton, yah sunus
mans skauiaij> sik
in
wuljjau attins seinis, mij) aggilum ]>aim
weiham.

qimi})

is,

J^an

forctam du nast da jjing de synd Godes,
ac da j)ing de synd manna.

34 Da cwsq]> he, togredere geclj^edrc
menegu, mid his leorning-cnihtum, Gif
hwa wyle me fyligean, widsace hine
sylfne, and nime his cwylminge, and
folgige me.

35 Se de wyle his sawle hale gedon,
se hi forspilji ; se de forspil)) his sawle
for me and for dam godspelle se hig
gehael}?.

36 Hwjrt fi'emaj> men, deah he eallne
middan-eard gestryne, and do his sawle
forw}Td 1
37 Odde hwylc gewryxl syl|) se man
for his sawle 1

38 S6|)lice se de me forsyhj), and mine
word on disre unriht-hsemedan and syn-
fulran cneorisse, done mannes sunu for-
sylij), donne he cymj> on his
fieder
wuldre, mid halgum englum.

Chap. IX.

i Yah qaj? du im. Amen
jjatei sind sumai jjize her
qijja izwis,
standandane, ))ai ize ni kausyand dau|>-
aus, unte gasaiwhand J^iudiuassu Guj>s
qumanana in malitai.

2 Yah afar dagans saihs ganam lesus
Paitru, yah lakobu, yah lohannen, yah
ustauh ins ana fairguiii hauh sundro
ainans ; yah inmaidida sik in andwair]?-
ya ize.

3 Yah wastyos is waur})un glitmun-
yandcins wheitos swe snaiws, swaleikos
swc wullareis ana airbai ni majr era-
wheityan.

4 Yah ataugij)S war]? im Helias mi|>
Mose, yah wesun rodyaudans mi|> lesua.

5 Yah andhafyands Paitrus qaj» du
lesua, Ixabbei, goj? isfc imsis her wisan ;
yah gawamkyam hliyans jirins, jms nin-
ana, yah ]\Iose ainana, yah ainana He-
liyin.

6 Ni auk wissa wha rodidedi ; wesun

auk usa<jidai.

7 Yah war}j milhma ufarskadwyands
im; yah qam stibna us |)amnia milhmin.

Chap. IX. i Da ssede he him, S6})lice
ic secge eow, dj^t sume synd her wun-
iende, de dea)) ne onb}Tigea}', ser
hi
geseon Godcs rice on msegne cuman."'"

2 Da sefter syx dagum nam se Haelend
Petrum, and lacobum, and lohanncm,
and laedde hi sylfe on sundron on sunine
heahne munt ; and wear}) beforan him
ofer-hiwod.

3 And his reaf >vurdon glitiniende swa
hwite swa snaw, swa nan fullere ofer
eor])an ne mceg swa hwite gedon.

4 Da oetywde him Helias mid Moyse,

and to him spraecon.

5 Da audswarode Petrus him and cwroj),
Lareow, god is da?t we her bcon ; and
uton wyrcan her )n*eo eardung-stowa, de
ane, and Moyse ane, and llclie ane.

6 S6|'lice he nyste hwaet he cwa?|) ; he

wa?s afacred mid ege.

7 And sec lyft hi ofersceadewode ; and
stefn com of daere lyfte, and cwa^j), Dcs

VIIT. 34.-IX. 7.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

211

me, Sathanas ; for thou sauerist not tho
thingis that ben of God, but tho thingis
that ben of men.
34 And the cumpanye of peple gederid,
with his disciplis, he seide to hem. If
ony man wole sue me, denye he him
self, and take he his cros, and sue he
me.
3^ Sothly who so wole make his soule^
saf, he sclial leese it ; forsothe he that
schal leese his soule^ for me and the
gospel, schal make it saf.

36 Sothli what profiteth it a man, if he
w}'nne al the world, and do peyringe to
his soule 1
37 Or what chaungyng schal a man
5yue for his soule 1

38 Forsoth who that schal knoleche
me, and my wordis in this generacioun
auoutresse, and mannis sone schal know-
leche him, whanne he schal come in the
glory of his fadir, with his aungels.

Goo after me, Satan ; for thou saverest
not the thynges off God, but the thynges
off men.

34 And he called the people vnto hym,
with his disciples also, and sayd vnto
them. Whosoever wyll folowe me, lett
hym forsake hym silfe, and take vp his
crosse, and folowe me.

35 For whosoever wyll save his lyfe,
shall lose it ; but whosoever shall lose
his lyfe for my sake and the gospels, the^
same shall save it.

36 What slial it profet a man yf he
shulde wyn all the worlde, and loose his
awne soule 1
37 Or els what shall a man geve to
redeme his soule agayne 1

38 Whosoever therfore shall be as-
shamed off me, and off my wordes a-
monge this advoutrous and sinfull gene-
racion, of hym shall the sonne of man
be ashamed, when he commeth in the
glory of his father, with the holy angels.

Chap. IX.

i And he seide to hem,
Treuly I seie to 30U, for ther ben sumnie
of men stondinge
the whiche
schulen not taste deeth, til thei sen the
rewme of God comynge in vertu.

here,

2 And aftir sixe dayes Jliesus took
Petre, and James, and John, and ledith
hem by hem sclue aloone in to an 1113
hil ; and he is transfigurid byfore hem.

3 And liis clothis ben maad schynynge
and wliite ful moche as snow, and which
maner clothis a fullere^ may not make
white on ertlie.

4 And Helyc with Moyses appcridc to
hem, and thei wercn spckyngc with
Jliesu.

5 And Pctrc answeringc seitli to Jhcsu,
Maistir, it is good vh for to ]>c here ;
make we here thro tabcma^jlis, oon to
thee, oon to Moyses, and oon to Ilclye.

Chap. IX. i And he sayde vnto them,
Yerely I saye vnto you, there be some
off them that stonde here, which shall
not taste of deeth, tyll they have sene
the kyngdom off God come with power.
2 And after .vj. dayes Jesus toke Peter,
James, and Jhon, and leede them vp in
to an hye mountayne out of the wayc
alone ; and he was transfigured before
them.

3 And his rayment did shyne and was
made very whyte even as snowe, so
whyte as noo fuller can make apon the
erth.

4 And there apercd vnto thcni ITelyas

with Moses, and they talked with Jesu.

5 And Peter answered and sayde to
Jesu, Master, liere is good beinge for vs ;
let vs make .iij. tabernacles, one for the,
one for Moses, and one for Helyas.

6 Sotlili he wistc not what he Rclinldc
eie ; forsotho thei wcron ngust by drrdc.
7 And thcr is maad a cloudc hcIijuIcw-
• inge hem ; and a voys cam of the cloudc,

6 And wist not wliat he sayde ; for

thoy were afniyde.

7 And there was a cloudc that shad-
dowcd them ; and a voycc cam out of

P2

1

3
9

;

212

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

Sa I'st
hausyai|?.

siinus raeins sa liuba, jjamma

is min leofesta sunu, gehyraj? bine.

8 Yah anaks insaiwhandans, ni ^an-
lesu

asei})S ainohun gasewhuii,
ainana mij) sis.

alya

9 Dalaj) j)an atgaggandam im af j^amma
fairgimya, anabau|> 1111, ei mannhun ni
spillododeina patei gascwhun, niba bij^e
suiius mans us dauj)aim ussto|)i.

8 And sona da hi bcsawon, hi nannc hi
mid liim ne gesawon, buton done Hael-
end sylfne mid him.

9 And da hi of dam munte astigon, he
bead him, daet hi nanum ne saedon da
]>ing de lii gesawon, biiton donne man-
nes sunu of deaj'e aiise.

10 Yali jjata waurd habaidcdun du sis
jjata, us

misso, sokyandans wha ist
dau])aim usstaudan.

10 Hi da diBt word geheoldon betwux
wsere,

him, and smeadon hwset dajt
donne he of deaj^e arise.

1

Yah fi-ehun ina, qi})andans, Unte
qi|)and jjai bokaryos, patei Helias skuli
qinian faur[)is ?

12 i|) IS andhafyands qa]) du i'm-, Helia
swc))auh qiniands faurjns, aftragaboteij)
alia ; yah whaiwa gameli|> ist bi sunu
mans, ei manag winuai, yah frakun)?s
wair|)ai.

11 And hi hine ahsodon da, Hwwt
secga}) Pharisei and da boccras, da^t
gebyi'a|) aerest Helias cume ]

12 Da ssede he him andswaricnde,
Helias ealle jjing ge-edniwaj), d(»niie he
cym}> ; swa be mannes suna a\vTiten is,
da3t he fela |)oh*ge, and si oferhogod.

'izwis,

13 Akci qi|'a

jjatci yu Helias
qam, yah gatawidedun imma swa filu
swe wildedun, swaswe gamelij? ist bi
ina.

14 Yah qimands at sipon3'am, gasawh
filu manageins bi ins, yah bokaryans
sokyandans mij? im.

15 Yah sunsaiw alia managei ga-
saiwliandans ina, usgoisnodeduu ; yah
duriiuiandaiis, inwitun ina.

16 Yah fi'ali

j?ans bokaryans, Wha

sokei[) miJ? |)aiin 1

17 Yah andhafyands ains

jnzai
managein qaj?,
brahta sunu
mcinana du |)us habaudan aliman un-
rodyandan ;

Laisari,

us

1

Ac ic sccge eow, da^t Helias com,
and hi dydon him swa liwa?t swa hi
woldon, swa be him awriten is.

14 And da he com to his leorning-
mycele menegu
cnihtum, he geseah
abiiton hi, and boceras mid him sprec-
ende.

15 And sona call folc dcene Heelend
gcseonde, wearji af-^red, and forht ; and
hine gretonde, him to union.

16 Da ahsode he hi, Hwa3t smeajje ffe

bctweox eow V

17 Him andswarode an of da?re men-
Lareow, ic brohte minne sunu

igu,
dumbne gast hsebbende

18 Yah |)iswharuh jjci ina gafa]ii|), ga-
wair|)i|> ina, yah wha))yi|), yah kriusti[)
Yah
tunlmns seinans, yah gastaurkni}).
qa[) sii)onyam jx-inaim, ei usdreibeina
ina, yah ni mahtedun.

18 Se swa hw.Tr swa he liine gel8ec|>,
forgnit hine, and t6}nim gristbita[>, and
And ic sjc(h^ dinnm Icorn-
forscrincj\
ing-cnihtum, diet hi hine ut-adrifon, and
hi ne mihton.

19 1|> is andhafyands im qa)), O ! kuni
ungalaubyando, und wlia at izwis siyau,
und wha j^ulau izwis ?
Baiiip ina du
mis.

1

Da andswarode he him, Eala I un-
geleaffiille cneorys, swa lange swa ic
mid eow ]>co, swa lauge ic eow j'olige ?
Bringa}) hine to me.

9
6
1

;

7
2
1

!

IX. 8-19.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
seyinge, This is my mooste deerewortlie
sone, heere 5e him.

8 And anon thei biholdinge aboute,
sy^e no more any man, no but Jhesus
oouly with hem.

9 And hem comynge down fro the hil,
he comaundide hem, that thei schulde
not telle to any man tho thingis that
thei hadde seyn, no but whanne mannis
sone hath risun fro deede spiritis.

TO And thei heelden the word at hem
silf, sekynge what schulde be, whanne
he hath risun fro deede.

1

And thei axiden him, seyinge, What
therfore seyn Pharisees and scribis, for
it bihoueth Helye for to come first ?

12 The which answeringe seith to hem,
Whanne Helye schal come first, he schal
restore alle thingis ; and hou it is writun
in to mannis sone, that he suffre many
thingis, and be despisid.

13 But I seie to 30U, for and Helye is
comun, and thei diden to him what euere
thingis thei wolden, as it is writun of
him.

14 And he comynge to his disciplis,
8y3 a greet cumpany aboute hem, and
scribis axynge with hem.

15 And anon al the cumpanye seynge
Jhesu, was astoneyed, and thei dreden ;
and thei rennynge to, greeten him.

1

And he axide hem, What seken 50

among 30U ?

TYNDALE, 1526.

213
the cloude, saynge, This ys my dere
Sonne, here hym.

8 And sodenly they loked rounde
aboute them, and sawe no man more,
but Jesus only.

9 As they cam doune from the hill, he
charged them, that they shulde tell no
man what they had sene, tyll the sonne
of man were risen from deeth agayne.

10 And they kepte that saynge with
in them, and demaunded won of another,
what that rysinge from deeth agayne
shulde meane.

1

And they axed hym, sayinge, Why
then saye the scribes, that Helyas muste
fyrste come 1

1

He answered and sayde vnto them,
Helyas at his fyrste commynge, shall
brynge all thynges agayne into good
order ; and even so ys it wrytten off
the Sonne off man, that he shall suffr^
many thinges, and shall be set
att
nought.

13 And T saye vnto you, thatt Helyas
ys come, and they have done vnto hym
whatsoever pleased them, as it is wrytten
off hym.

14 And he cam to his disciples, and
sawe moche people aboute them, and
the scribes disputinge with them.

15 And streyght waye all the people
behelde hym, and were amased ; and
ran to hym, and saluted hym.

16 And he sayde vnto the scribes.

What dispute ye with them ?

17 And oon of the cumpany answer-
inge seidc, Maistir, I haue brou3t to
tliec my sone hauynge an vnclcne spirit

1

And won of the companye answered
and sayde, Master, I have brought my
Sonne vnto the which hath a dom spirite j

18 The which whcr euere he schal take
hyin, hirtith him, and he frothith,^ and
betith to giderc with teeth, and wexith
dryc. And I seidc to tin disciplis, tliat
thei flchuldcn caste hyni out, and thei
my3tcn not.

1

The which answeringe to licm seidc,
A ! thou Hclirowid genonicioun und out
of bileue, liou longc schal I be ut 30U,
hou longc Hclial
Bryrigc
je hym to mc.

I suffre 30U ]

18 And whensoever he takcth hym, he
teurcth hym, and he fometh, and gnussh-
cth with his tcthc, and pynetli awaye.
And I spake to thy discii)k'S, that tlicy
shulde caste hym out, and they coulde
nott.

19 He answered him and sayd, O
goiuMiicion without faight, howc loni^o
shall Y 1)0 with you, howe louge shall Y
sufl'rc you] Bringe liim vnto mo.

1

1

;

;

214

GOTHIC, 360.

20 Yah bralitcdun ina at ininia.

Yah
gasiiiwhands ina, sunsaiw sa aluna tahida
'ina ; yah driusands ana airjja, wahvisoda
Avha|)yands.

2

Yah frah ))ana attan is, Whan lagg
1\> is qa}),

mel 1st, ei })ata war)) imma 1
Us barn i skya ;

wato, ei

22 Yah ufta ina yah in fon atwarp yah
akei
in
yabai mageis, hilp unsara, gableijjyands
unsis.

usqistidedi imma ;

23 I j) lesiis qaj) du imma, pata yabai
mageis galaubyan, allata mahteig j^amma
galaubyandin.

24 Yah sunsaiw ufhropyands sa atta

|>is barnis mij? tagram qa)?, Galaubya
hilp meinaizos ungalanbeinais.

25 Gasaiwhands ])an lesus )?atei samaj)
rann manage!, gawhotida ahmin jjamma
unhrainyin, qij^ands du imma, pu ahma
|)u unrodyands yah baujjs, ik j)us ana-
biuda, usgagg us jjamma, yah jjanaseijjs
ni galei})ais in ina.

26 Yah hropyands, yah filu tahyands
ina, usiddya; yah warjj swe dau)5S, swa-
swc managai qe|)un, })atei gaswalt.

27 Ijj lesus undgreipands ina bi hand-

au, urraisida ina ; yah ussto}).

28 Yah galeij'andan ina in gard, sip-
onyos is frehun ina sundro, Duwhe weis
ni mahtedum usdreiban jjana ?

29 Yah qajj du im,

pata kuni in
waihtai ni mag usgaggan, niba in bidai
yah fastubnya.

30 Yali yain})ro usgaggandans, iddye-
dun jjairh Galeihiian ; yah ni wilda ei
whas wissedi.

3

Unte hiisida siponyans seinans, yah
qaj) du im, patei sunus mans atgibada
in handiins manne, yah usqimand imma,
yah usqisti|)S, jjridyin daga usstandi|).

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

20 Da brohton hi hine.

And da he

hine geseah, sona se gast hine gedrefde
and on eorjjan forgnydeu, faemende he
tearflode.

21 And da ahsode he hys faeder, Hii
lang tid is, syddan him dis gebyrede ]
Da cwse}) he, Of cildhade ;

22 He hine gelomh'ce on fyr and on
waeter sende, daet he hine forspilde ; ac
gif du hwaet miht, gefylst us, lire ge-
miltsod.

23 Da cwsej) se Hselend, Gyf du ge-
lyfan miht, ealle |)ing synd gelyfedum
militlice.

24 Da sona hrymde daes cildes foder
and wepende cw8e|>, Drihten, ic gelyfe ;
gefylst minre ungeleaffuhiysse.

25 And da se Hselend geseah da to-
yrnendan menegu, he behead dam un-
clsenan gaste, dus cwedende, Eala dcafa
and dumba gast, ic beode de, ga of him,
and ne ga dii leng on hine.

26 He da hrymende, and hine s^^'yde
slitende, eode of him ; and he wa^s
swylce he dead wsere, swa da3t manega
cwaedon, s6|)lice he is dead.

27 Da nam se Haelend his hand, and

hine up-ahof ; and he aras da.

28 And da he into dam huse eode, his
leorning-cnihtas hine digollice ahsodon,
Hwi ne mihton we hine ut-adrifan ?

29 Da saede he, Dis cyn ne ma'g of
nanum men ut-gan, biiton purh gebedu
and on fiestene.

30 Da hi danon fcrdon, hig forbugon
Galileam ; he nolde diet hit senig man
wiste.

31

his

S6|>lice he laerde

leorning-
cnihtas, and saede, S6))lice mannes sunu
h\\) gcseakl on synfulra handa, da-t hi
hine ofslcan, and ofslagen, dam j)riddan
dage he arist.

32 1[)

eis ni fro]>nn j'amma wanrda,

32 Da nyston hi da?t word, and lii

yah ohtcdun ina fraihnan.

lidredon hine jihsicndc.

33 Yah qnm in Kafarnaum.
garda (jumaiis, frali
mij> izwis misso mitodcdu)??

Yah in
ins, Wha in wiga

33 Da comon hi to Capliarnaum. And
a?t h:im waeron, he ahsode hi,

da hi
Hwaet smeade ge be wege?

i

1

;

1

IX. 20-33-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

20 And tliei brou^ten hym to.

And
whanne he hadde seyn him, anon the
spirit troublide him ; and he cast doun
in to the erthe, was walewid frothinge.

TYNDALE, 1526.

215
20 And they brought him vnto him.
And as sone as the sprete sawe him, he
tare him ; and he fell doune on the
grounde, walowinge and fomynge.

2

Ajid he axide his fadir, Hon moche
of tyme it is, sithen this thing fel to
him 1 And he seith, Fro childhod ;

22 And ofte he hath sent him and in
to fier and in to watir, that he schulde
leese him ; but and if thou maist 'Ony
thing, help vs, hauynge mercy on vs.

2

And he axed his father, Howe lono-e
IS it a goo, sens this hath happened hym ?
And he sayde, Of a chylde ;

22 And ofte tymes casteth hym in to
the f}Te and also in to the water, to
destroye hym ; butt yfF thou canste do
eny thynge, have mercy on vs, and
helppe vs.

23 Sothli Jhesus seith to him, If thou
maist bileue, alle thingis ben possible to
a man bileuynge.

24 And anon the fadir of the child cri-

ynge with teeris seide, Lord, I bileue
help thou myn vnbileuefulnesse.

25 And whanne Jhesus hadde seyn the
company of peple rennynge to gidere,
lie manaside to the vnclene spiritj sey-
inge to him, Thou deef and doumb
spirit, I comaund thee, go out fro him,
and entre not more in to hin^

26 And he criynge, and moche to-
breidynge him, wente out fro him ; and
he is maad as deed, so that manye seiden,
that he was deed.

27 Forsoth Jhesus holdynge his bond,

lifte vp him ; and he roos.

28 And whanne he hadde entrid in to
an hous, his disciplis axiden him priuely,
Whi my3ten not we caste hym out 1

29 And he seyde to hem, This kynde
in no tiling may go out, no but in preier
and fasti nge.

30 And thei gon fro thennis, wenten
forth in to Galile ; and he wolde no
man wite.

31 He tau^te his disciplis, and seide
to hem, For mannus sone schal be bi-
trayed in to the hondis of men, and thei
Bchulcn sle him, and he shiyn, on the
thridde day schal rise a3en.

32 And tlici kncwen not the word, and

drcddcn for to axe him.

33 And thei camcn to Ciifarnnum,
Which whcnno he was in the lious, axide
hem, What trctiden 3c in the wcic 1

23 Jesus sayde vnto him. Ye yf thou
couldest beleve, all thynges are possyble
to hym that belevith.

24 And streygthwaye the father off the
chylde cryed with teares sayinge, Lorde,
I beleve ; sucker myne vnbelefe.

25 When Jesus sawe that the people
cam runnynge togedder vnto hym, he
rebuked the foule sprete, sayinge vnto
hym, Thou dom and deffe sprete, I
charge the, come out of hym, and entre
no more in to hym.

26 And the sprete cryed, and rent him
sore, and cam out ; and he was as won
that had bene deed, in so moche that
many sayde, he is deed.

27 Butt Jesus caught hys honde, and

lyfte hym vpp ; and he roose.

28 And when he was come in to the
housse, his disciples axed him secretly,
Why coulde nott we caste hym out 1

29 And he sayde vnto them, Thys
kynde can by non other meanes come
forth, but by prayer and fastynge.

30 And they departed thens, and toke
there iorney thorowe Galile ; and woldc
not that eny man shulde have knowen itt.
31 For he taught hys disciples, and
sayde vnto them. The sonnc off man
shalbe delyvered in to the hondes off
men, and they shall kyll hym, and after
that he ys kyllcd, he shall aryse agayno
the thryd daye.

32 Butt they wiHtc nott what that say-
inge meant, and were affrayed to axo
hym.

33 And he cam to Capernaum.
And
when he was come to housse, he saydo
to them. What was that ye disputed by-
twcnc you by the waye 1

216

GOTHIC, 36o.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

34 I}) eis slawaidcdun ; du sis misso

audruuuun, wharyis iimists wesi.

34 And hi suwodon ; witodlice hi on
wege smcadon, hwylc hyra yldost wsere.

35 Yah situnds atwopida [)ans twalif,
yah qa}) du ini. Yaljai whas wili frumists
wisan, siyai allaize aftumists, yah allaim
andhahts,

36 Yah nimands barn, gasatida ita 'in
midyaim im ; yah ana armins nimands
iijta, qajj du im,

35 Da he saet he clypode hi twelfe,
and saede him, Gif eower liwylc wylc
beon fyrmest, beo se eactmodost, and
eower ealra j?en.

36 Da nam he anne cnapan, and ge-
sette on hyra middele ; da he hine
beclypte, he saede him,

ain

37 Saei

|>ize swaleikaize barne
andnimij) ana namin meinamma, mik
andnimi}?; yah sawhazuh saei mik and-
ninii}>, ni mik andnimijj, ak )jana sand-
yandan mik.

38 Andhof \>an "imma lohannes, qij>-
auds, Laisari, sewhum sumana in ]>em-
amma namin usdreibandan unhuljjons,
saei ni hiisteij? unsis, yah waridedum
imma, unte ni laistei|j unsis.

is

39 Ij)

qaj), Ni waryi)> imma ;
ni mannahun auk ist saei tauyij? maht
in namin meinamma, yah magi sprauto
ubil waurdyan mis.

37 Swa hAvylc swa anne of dus ge-
radum cnapum on minum naman onfehj',
se onfeh|) me ; and se de me onfeh}>, he
ne oufeh|) me, ac done de me sende."^

38 Da andswarode lohannes, and cwie}),
Lareow, sumne we gesawon on dinum
naman deofol-seocnessa lit-adrifende, se
ne fyligj) us, and we him forbudon.

39 Da cwaej) he, Ne forbeode ge hira ;
nis nan de on minum naman niiegen
wyrce, and maege rade be me yfele
sprecan.

40 Unte saei nist wi])ra izwis, faur

40 Se de nis agen cow, se is

for

iz>vis ist.

eow.

4T Saei auk allis gadragkyai izwis
stikla watins in namin meinamma, unte
Christaus siyu)>, amen qi|)a izwis, ei ni
fi'aqisteij) mizdon seinai.

41 S6|)lice se de syl)> drinc eow calic
fulne wivteres on minum naman, fordam
ge Cristes synd, ic eow s6|) secge, ne
forlyst he his mede.

42 Yah sawhazuh saei gamarzyai ain-
ana })ize leitihme j;ize gaUiubyandane du
mis, go}) ist imma raais ei galagyaidau
asi]u(jairnus ana balsaggan is, yah fra-
waurj)ans wesi in marein.
43 Yah yabai marzyai
})uk handus
; goj) |ms ist hamfauima
jjcina, afmait }h)
J)au twos handuns
in lil)ain
hal)andin galeijnin in gaiainuan, in fon
pata unwlia})nando,

galci|>an,

44 parci ma))a ize ni gaswilti)), yali fon

ni afwhapnij).

45 Yah yabai fetus j>cins marzyai |)uk,
afmait ina ;
in
libain haltamma, jmu twans fotuns lial)-
andin gawairpan in gaiaiunau, in fon
J)ata unwlia])nan(lo,

goj) )ms ist

galeij^an

46 paroi ma|ni ize ni gaswilti)>, yah

42 And swa hwa swa gedrefji ?cnne of
dyssum lytlingum on me gelyfcndum,
betere him wsere dset an eweorn-stan
wacre to his sweoran gecn}i;, and weere
on sae beworpen.

43 And gif din hand de s^^^ca|), ceorf
hi of ; betere de is da?t dii wanhal to
life ga, donne dii twa handa luobbe and
fare on belle, and on unficwencedlic

44 Dar h}Ta wjTm ne swylt, and fyr

ne bi|» jicwenced.

45 And gif din fot swicaj) de, ceorf
betere de is d:vt du healt
hine of ;
ga on ece lif, donne du ha*l>be twcgen
fet and si aworpen on
una-
cwcncodliccs fvres,

belle,

46 Dar hyra wyrm ne swylt, ne fyr ne

fon ni afwhapni|).

h\]> adwiBSced.

47 Yah yabai augo j^cin marzyai |)uk,

47 Gif din cage de swicaj), weorp hit

IX. 34-47-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;
;

217

34 And tliei weren stille ; sothli tliei
disputiden among hem in ttie weie, who
of hem schulde be more.
35 And he sittinge clepide the twelue,
and seith to hem, If any man wole be
the first among 50U, he schal be the
laste, and myuystre of alle.

36 And he takinge a childe, ordeynede
him in the myddil of hem ; whom
whanne he hadde byclippid, he seith to
hem,
37 Who euere schal receyue oon of
suche children in my name, he receyueth
me ; and who euere receyueth me, he
receyueth not me aloone, but him that
sente me.

38 John answeride to him, sejringe,
Maistir, we sy3en sum oon for to caste
out fendis in thi name, the which sueth
not vs, and we han forbedun him.

39 Sothli Jhesus seith to him, Nyle ^e
forbede him ; ther is no man that doth
vertu in my name, and may soone speke
yuele of me.

34 And they helde their peace ; for by
the waye they reasoned amonge them
selves, who shulde be the chefest.

35 And he sate doune and called the
twelve vnto hym, and sayd to them, Yf
eny man desj^e to be fyrst, the same
shalbe last off all, and servaunt vnto all.
36 And he toke a chylde, and sett hym
in the myddes of them ; and toke hym
in hys armes, and sayde vnto them,

37 Whosoever receave eny soche a
chylde in my name, he receaveth me
and whosoever receaveth me, receaveth
not me, but him that sent me.

38 Jhon answered him, sayinge. Master,
we sawe won castinge out devyls in thy
name, which foloweth not vs, and we
forbade hym, be cause he foloweth vs
nott.
39 But Jesus sayde, Forbid hym nott
for there ys no man that shall do a
myracle in my name, and can sj)eake
lightly evyll of me.

40 Forsothe he that is not a3ens vs, is

40 "^Tiosoever is not agaynste you, is

for vs.

41 Sothli who euere schal ^yue drynke
to 50U a cuppe of cold watir in my name,
for 3e ben of Crist, treuly I seie to 30U,
he schal not leese his mede.

42 And who euere schal sclaundre oon
of thes litle bileuynge in me, it is good
to him that a mylne stoon of assis were
don aboute his necke, and were sent in
to the see.

43 And if thin bond sclaundre thee,
kitt it awey ; it is good to thee feblc to
entre in to lyf, than liauynge twey liondis
go in to helle, in to fier that neuere schal
be quenchid,

44 Where the worm of hem dcieth not,

and the fier is not (^uenchid.

45 And if thi foot sclaundre thee, kitt
it of; it is good to thee for to entre
crokid in to cuerlasting lyf, tlian liau-
ynge twey feet to be sent in to helle of
fier, that neucr schal be (|ii('n('lii«l,

46 Where the worm of lioiii dcieth not,

on youre parte.

41 And whosoever shall geve you a
cuppe off" water to driuke for my nams
sake, be cause ye are belongynge to
Christe, verely I saye vnto you, he shall
nott loose his rewarde.

42 And whosoever shall hourte won of
litell wons that beleve in me, it
this
were better for him that a myll stone
were hanged aboute his necke, and that
he were cast in to the see.

43 And yf thy hande offend e the, cut
hym of; itt ys better for the to entre
into lyffe maymed, then to goo with two
hondes in to hell, in to fire that never
shalbe quenched,

44 Where there worme dycth nott, and

the fyre never gocth oute. •
45 And yf thy fote offcnde the, cut
hym of; it is better for the to goo halt
in to lyfe, then with ij. fete to be cast
into hell, into fyre that never shalbe
(|Uonch(!(l,

46 Where there worme dycth not, and

and the fier is not quenchid.

the fyre never gocth oute.

47 That if thin y3c sclaundre thee, cast

47 And yf tliync eye offendc the, plucko

2
1

;

2
1

218

GOTHIC, j6o.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

go)^ jms ist hailiamma
uswairp "imma ;
gulei|;an in })iu(lan,i(ar(l}u Gu[)S, [)au twa
aiigona habandiu atwairpan in gaiainnan
fun ins,

48 parei ma})a ize ni gadaujjnijj, yah

ut ; betere tie is mid anum cagan gan
on Godes rice, donne twa eagan haib-
bende sy aworpen on helle fyr,

48 Dar hyra wyrm ne swylt, ne fyr ne

fon ni afwhapnij).

bij) acwenced.

49 Whazuli auk funin

saltada, yah

wharyatoh hunsle salta saltada.

50 Go}) salt ;

i|) yabai salt unsaltan
wairj)ij), whe suj)uda ?
HabaiJ? in izwis
salt, yah gawaii-J)eigai siyaij) mi]? izwis
misso.

49 S6|)lice aeic man bif) mid fyre ge-
sylt, and aelc offrung bij) mid sealte
gesylt.

^

50 God is sealt ; gif dret scalt unsealt
bij), on dam de ge hit syltaj) '?
Habbaj)
sealt on cow, and habbaj? sibbe betwux
eow.

CiiAP. X.

I Yah yain|)ro usstand-
ands, qam in markom ludaias hindar
laurdanau ; yah gaqemun sik aftra man-
agcins du imma, yah swe biuhts, aftra
laisida ins.

2 Yah duatgaggandans

Fareisaieis,
frehun ina, Skuldu siyai maun qen af-
satyan 1 fraisandans ina.

3 1|? is andhafyands qaj), "Wha izwis

Chap. X.

1 And danon, he com on
ludeisce eudas of lordane ; da comon
eft menigu to him, and swa swa he
gewunode, he hi Iserde eft-s6na.

2 Da genealaehton him Pharisei, and
hine axodou, Hwa?der alyt]? aenegum
men his wif forlsetan 1 his dus fand-
igende.

3 Da andswarode he him, Ilwret bead

anabauj) Moses ?

Moyses eow 1

4 I]> eis qe})un, Moses uslaubida unsis

bokos afsateinais melyan, yah afletan.

4 Hi ssedon, Moyses lyfde dret man

write hiw-gedales boc, and hi forlete.

5 Yah andhafyands lesus qa]) du im,
gamelida

Wi}?ra harduhairtein izwara
izwis ))0 anabusn.

6 1|> af anastodeinai gaskaftais gumcin

5 Da cweej? se Haelend, For eowre
heortan heardnesse he eow wnit dis
bebod.

6 Fram fhiman gesceafte God bi ge-

yah qincin gatawida Gu}>

7 Inuli j)is bilci{)ai manna attin seinam-

ma yah aijieiu seinai,

worhtc wsepncdman and wimman ;

7 And cwa3J), Fordam sc man forlaet
his

his f«der and moder, and hine
wife gc|)eot,

8 Yah siyaina })0 twa du leika saniin.
Swaswe ])auasci]>s ni siud twa, ak leik
ain.

8 And beoj) twegen on jmuni flaesce.
Witodlice ne synd na twegen, ac an

flsesc.

9 ])atci nil Gu|) gawa)», manna ))ainina

9 Dffit God gesamnode, ne syndrige

ni skaidai.

da3t nan man.

10 Yah in garda aftra siponyos is bi

10 And eft innan huse his leorning-

J)ata samo frcOnm ina.

1

Yali <pi|) du ini, Sawhazuh saei
anj)ara,

aflctij) qen seina, yah liugai)>
horinoj) du jiizai.

1

Yah yabai (|ino aflctij) aban seinana,

yah liugada anjjaramma, horinoj).

cnihtas hine be dam ylcan j^lisodou.

1

Da cwiej) he, Swa hwylc man swa
his wif forlaet, and oder nim]), unriht-
haemcd he wyrc)> jnirh hi.

1

And gif da't wif hire were forlaet,

and oderne nim)), heo unriht-haemj).^

1

1

IX. 48.-X. 12.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

219

it out ; it is good to thee for to entre
gogil y3ed in to rewme of God^ than
, hauynge twey y5en for to be sent in to

helle of fier,

hym oute ; itt ys better for the to goo
in to the kyngdom of God with one eye,
then havynge two eyes to be caste into
hell fyre,

48 Where the worm of hem deieth not,

48 Where their worme dyeth nott, and

and the fier is not quenchid.

49 Forsoth euery man schal be saltid^
with tier, and euery slayn sacrifice schal
be sauorid with salt.

50 Salt is good thing ; that if salt be
vnsauori, in what thing schulen ^e make
it sauori ] Haue ^e salt in 50U, and
haue 36 pees among 30U.

I

the fyre never goeth oute.
49 Every man therfore shalbe salted
with fyre, and every sacryfyse shalbe
seasoned with saltt.

50 Salt ys good ; but yf the salt be
vnsavery, what shall ye salte there with 1
Se that ye have saltt in youre selves,
and have peace amonge youre selves one
with another.

Chap'. X.

i And Jhesus risynge vp
fro thennis, cam in to the endis of Jude
ouer Jordan ; and eftsoones the cum-
panyes of peple camen to gidere to him,
and as he was wont, eftsoone he tau3te
hem.

2 And Pharisees comynge ny3, axiden
him. If it be leefful to a man for to
leeue^ his wyf ] temptinge him.

3 And he answeringe seith to hem,

What comaundide Moyses to 30U 1

4 The whiche seiden, Moyses suff'ride
to write a libel of forsakinge, and to
forsake.

5 To whom Jhesus answeringe seith,
To the hardncsse of 30ure herte Moyses
wroot to 30U this precept.

6 Forsothe fro the bigynnyng of crea-
ture God made hem male and female ;

7 And he seide, For this thing a man
Bchal leeue fadir and modir, and schal
clefe to his wif,

8 And thei schulen be tweyne in o
And so now thei ben not

fleisch.
tweyne, but o fleisch.

9 Therfore that thing that God ioynede

to gidcro, no man depaile.

10 And eftsoone in the hows his dis-

ciplis axiden liini of the same thing.

1

And lie seith to hem. Who eucre
schal leeue his wyf, and weddc another,
he doth auoutrie vpon hir.

12 And if the wyf Hchal Iceuc liir hosc-
bonde, and bo weddiii to another, slic
doth auoutrie.

Chap. X.

i And he rose from thens,
and went in to the coostes of Jewry
through the regyon that ys beyonde
lordan ; and the people resorted vnto
hym afresshe, and as he was wont, he
taught them agayne.

2 And the Pharyses cam, and axed hym
a question. Whether it were laufuU for
a man to putt awaye hys wyfe"?
to
prove hym.

3 He answered and said vnto them,

"What did Moses bid you do ?

4 And they sayde, Moses suffred to
wryte a testimoniall of her divorsment,
and to putt her awaye.

5 And Jesus answered and sayd vnto
them, For because of youre harde herttes
he wrote thys i)recept vnto you.

6 But at the fyrst creacion God made

them man and woman ;

7 Sayinge, For thys thinges sake shall
a man leve father and mother, and byde
by his wyfe,

8 And .ij. shalbe made won flcsshe. So
then are they nowe nott twayne, but
won flesshe.

9 Therfore that whych God hath cup-

pled, let nott man separate.

10 And in the houssc his disciples axed

him agayne of that mater.

1

And he sayde vnto them. Whoso-
ever putteth awaye his wyfe, and marycth
another, breuketh wcdloclui to her warde.
12 And yf a woman forsake her hus-
band, and be marycd to another, she
committcth advoutry.

9

220

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

13 panuh Jitberun du imma barna, ei
|>ai siponyos is sokuD

ij)

attaitoki im ;
]7aim bairandam du.

14 Gasaiwhands Jjan Icsus, unwerida,
yali qa}) du im, Leti}) j^o barna gaggan
du mis, yah ni waryij> \>o, uute jjize ist
piudaiigardi Gu|)S.

15 Amen qij^a izwis, saei ni andnimij)
piudangardya G\i\>a swe barn, ni |>auli
qimij) in "izai.

13 And hi brohton him liyra lytlingas,
djct he hi oet-hrinc ; da ciddon his leorn-
ing-cnihtas dam de hi brohton.

14 Da se Haelcnd hi gescah, unwurd-
licc he hit forbead, and ssede him, Laetaj)
da lytlingas to me cuman, and ne for-
bcode ge him, s6|)lice s^^'}•lcera is heofona
rice.

15 S6|>lice ic secge eow, swa hwylc
swa Godcs rice ne onfehj) swa lytling,
ne gsejj he on dcet.

16 Yah ga))laihands 'im, lagyands hand-

16 Da beclypte he hi, and his handa

uns ana ]>o, J)iu|?ida im.

ofer hi setteude, bletsode hi."*"

17 Yah usgaggandin imma in

wig,
duatrinnands ains, yah knussyands, ba|?
ina, qi|>ands,Laisari j)iu|)eiga, wha tauyau,
ei libainais aiweinons arbya wairjjau ?

17 And da he on wege code, sum him
to arn, and gebigcdum cneowe toforan
him, cwa?}), and bapd bine. La goda
lureow, hwtet do ic, da^t ic ece lif age 1

18 I|) is qaj) du imma, Wha raik qi|)is
J>iu|>eigana ? Ni whashun j)iu|;eigs, alya
ains Guj).

1

ni

pos anabusnins kant, ni horinos, ni
ga-
maur)>ryais,
liugaweitwods, ni anamahtyais, swerai
attan |)einana yah aijjoin J)eina.

hlifais,

siyais

ni

20 paruh andhafyands qa}) du imma,
|)o aUa gafastaida us yundai

Lai sari,
meiuai.

21 l)j Icsus insaiwhands du imma,
friyoda ina ; yah qa|> du imma, Ainis
)>us wan ist ; gagg, swa tilu swe liabais
frabugei, yah gif [)arbam, yah habais
huzd in liiminam ; yah liiri, laistyan
mik nimands galgan.

22 1|)

is ganipnands in j'is waurdis,
galuij? gaurs, WJis auk liabands laihu
maiiag.

23 Yah bisaiwhands Icsus, qa|) sipon-
ynm seiiiaim, Sai wliaiwa nglul)a [»ai laiho
gahal>aiuhms in j)iudangardya Guj)a ga-

lei|)and.
24 I|)

|)ai siponyos afslaujinodcdun in
waurdc is.
j)aruh Icsus aftra andliaf-
yands (\i\\> im, Barnilona, wliaiwa aglu
in

|)aim hugyanihvm afar
ist,
))iudangardya Ciu|>s galei|)au.

faihau

18 Da cwse]) se Hselend, Hwi segst dii
Nia nan man god, biiton

me godne ?
God ana.

19 Canst dii da bebodu, ne unriht-
haem dii, ne slyh du, ne stel
dii, ne
sege dii lease gewitnessc, facen ne do
dii, wcor|)a dinne fa^der and d ne nioder.
20 Da andswarode be, Goda lareow,

call dis ic geheold of minre geogude.

21 Se Hselcnd hine da behcaldende,
lufode ; and sacde him, A'n j^ing de is
wana ; gesylc call da?t dii j^ge, and sylc
hit |)carfum, donne hajfst dii gold-hord
on heofonum ; and cum, and folga mc .

22 And for dam wordc he w.ts ge-
unret, and fcrde gnornigende, fordaiu
he lijvfdc myccle adita.

23 Da cw8p)> se Heelend to his leorning-
cnihtum, hine beseonde, Swydc earfoj)-
ga|> da de fcoh
lice on Godcs rice
habba|).

24 Da forhtodon his Icorning-cnihtas
Ilicleud him
be his wordum.
andswaricnde cw.t|>, Eala cild, swydc
earf()|)licc da de on hcora feo getruwig-
ca|j gjij) on Godcs rice.

Eft se

25 Azitizo ist ulbaudau jniirh ))airko

25 Eadcrc ys olfcndc to farcnne jurh

8
3

;

3
9
1

X. 13-25] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

221

And thei offriden to him litle cbil-

1

dren, that he schulde
sotheli disciplis thretenyden to men of-
frino^e.

touche hem

14 Whom whanne Jhesus hadde seyn,
he baar heuye/ and seith to hem, SufFre
5e litle children for to come to me, and
forbede ^e hem not, forsoth of suche is
the kyngdom of God.

15 Treuli I seie to 5011, who euere
schal not receyue the kyngdom of God
as this litle child, he schal not entre in
to it.

16 And he biclippinge hem, and putt-

inge hondis vpon hem, blesside hem.

.

17 And whanne Jhesus was gon out
in the weye, o man rennynge bifore, the
kne bo'sv'id, preiede him, seiynge, Goode
maistir, what schal I do, that I receyue
euerlastinge lyf *?

1

Forsothe Jhesus seide to him, What
'seist thou me good ? No man good, no
but God aloone.

19 Thou hast knowen the comaunde-
mentis, do thou non auoutrie, sle not,
stele not, seie not fals witnessinge, do
no fraude, worschipe thi fadir and modir.
20 And he answeringe seith to him,
Maistir, I haue kept alle these thingis
fro my 30uthe.

21 Sothli Jhesus biheld him, and louyde
and he seide to him, O thing
hym ;
failith to thee ; go thou, selle thou what
euere thingis thou hast, and 3yue to pore
men, and thou schalt haue tresour in
heuene ; and come, sue thou me.

22 The which maad sorwful in the
word, wente awey mornyngc, forsoth he
was hauynge many possesciouns.

23 And Jlicsus biholdingc aboute, seith
to his disciplis, llow hard thei that ban
money schulen entre in to the kyngdom
(^fO.Ml.

24 Forsothe the disci[)lis wcrcn ston-
And Jhesus eft-
cycd in bis wordis.
Boonc answeringe seith to hem, 3c litle
is, men trist-
sones, how hard thing it
ynge in richcHsis for to entre in to the
kyngdom of God.

1

And they brought chyldren to hym,
that he shoulde touche them ; and hys
disciples chid thoose that brought them.

14 When Jesus sawe that, he was dis-
pleased, and sayd vnto them, SufFre the
chyldren to come vnto me, and forbid
them not, for vnto suche belongeth the
kingdom of God.

15 Verely I saye to you, whosoever
shall not receave the kyngdom of God
as a chylde, he shall not entre therin.

16 And he toke them vppe in his
armes, and putt his hondes apon them,
and blessed them.

17 And when he was come out into
the waye, there cam won runninge, and
kneled to him, and axed him, Goode
master, what shall I do, that I maye
enheret eternal lyfe 1

18 Jesus said vnto him, Why callest
thou me goode ] There is no man goode
but won, whych ys God.

1

Thou knowest the commaundmentes,
breake not matrimony, kyll not, steal e
nott, here no falce wytnes, defraude no
man, honore thy father and thy mother.
20 He answered and said to him.
Master, all theese I have observed from
my youth.

2

Jesus behelde him, and had a favour
to him ; and said vnto him, Won thinge
is lackinge vnto the ; goo, and sell all
that thou hast, and geve itt to the
povre, and thou shalt have treasure in
heven ; and come, and folowe me and
take thy crosse on the.

22 But he was discumforted with that
sayinge, and went awaye mornyngc, for
he had greate possessions.

23 And Jesus lokcd rounde aboute,
and sayd vnto hys discii)les, With what
shall they that have rychcs
difficulte
entre into the kingdom of God.

24 Hys disciples were astonnyed att
Jesus answered agayno
hys wordcs.
and sayde vnto them, Cliyhlren, howo
harde is it, for them that truste in their
rychcs to entre in to the kyngdom olf
(iod.

25 It is li3tcr^ a camel for to i)assc

25 Hit ys easyer for a camcll to go

222

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

iie|)los ^iik'i))an, \>au gabigaiiima in )'lucl-
aiigardya Gujjs galci})aii.

naedle l>yrel, donne se rlca and se welega
on Godes rice ga.

26 Jj>

cis mais usgcisnodedun,

q\\>-
andans du sis misso, Yah whas mag
ganisan 1

27 insaiwliands du im jfesus, qa]), Akei
fram niaiinam iiiiinahteig ist, ni fram
allata auk mahteig ist fram
Gujja ;

Gu[)a.

28 Dugann |>an Paitrus qijian du im-
ma, Sai ! weis aiiailotum alia, yah laist-
idedum j)uk.

29 Andhafyauds 1111 Icsus qa]), Amen
qi})a izwis, ni whashun ist saei aflailoti
gard, ai})})au
ai|)ein,
ai))))au attan, ai|5})au qen, ai})l)au barna,
ai})))au haimojjlya in mcina yah in J)izos
aiwaggelyons,

bro))runs,

ai})j)au

30 Saei ni andnimai .r.

faljj nu 'in
jjamma mela, gardins, yah bro|>runs, yah
swistruns, yah attan, yah aijjein, yah
barna, yah haimo|>lya, mij) wrakom, yah
in aiwa Jjamma anawairj;in libain aiw-
einon.

26 Hi cla?s cle ma betwux him ^^'un-
di-edon, and cwsedon, And hwfi ma^g
beon hal?

27 Da beheold se Hselend hi, and
cwtej), Mid mannum hit is uneadelic, ac
na mid Gode ;
ealle jiing mid Gode
synd eadelice.

28 L/a ongan Petnis ewedan, AVitod-
))ing forleton, and fol-

Jice ! we ealle
godon de.

29 Da andswarode him se Haelend,
Nis nan de his bus forlaet, odde ge-
brodru, odde geswustra, odde IWder,
odde moder, odde beam, odde teceras
for me and for dam godspelle,

30 De hund-feald ne onfo nu on disse
tide, bus, and brodru, and swustra, and
and beam, and
fa?der
feceras, mid ehtnessum, and on to-
weardre worulde ece lif.

moder,

and

31 A|)|\an manai^ai wair|)and, frumans

31 ^lanega fyrmeste beo|> ytemestc,

aftumans, yah aftumans frumans.

and ytemeste f}Tmeste.

32 Wesunu])-J)an ana wiga gaggandans
du iairusaulwmai ; j-ah Eiurbigaggands
ins lesus, yah sildaleikidedun, yah afar-
Yah
laistyandans
andnimands aftra jians
tvvalif, dugann
'im qijjan, j^oci habaidcdun ina gadaban.

waurjmn.

faurhtai

33 patei sai ! usgaggara in lairusaul-
wma, yali sunus mans atgibada |mim
ufargudyam, yah bokaryam ; yah ga-
wargyand ina dau})au,

and se

32 IS6j)lice hi ferdon on wege to Hieru-
Ha?lend him beforau
salem ;
eode, and hi adredon him bine, and him
And eft he nam hi twclfe,
fyligdon.
and ongan him secgan, da J)iiig de him
towearde wseron.

33 Diet we mi astiga]> to Hieruf^alem,
and mannes sunu bi}) geseald sacerda
ealdrum, and Ix'ocrum, and ealdrum ;
and hi bine dea})e geuyderiaj), and hi
bine |)Codum syllaj).

34 Yah bilaikand ina, yah bliggwand
ina, yah speiwand ana ina; yali u.S(jimand
imma, yah ))ridyin daga ustandi|>.

..35 Yah athabaidedun sik du imma
lakobus yali Johannes, sunyus Zaibai-
daiaus, qi))andans, Laisari, wileima, ei
I'atei

I'uk l)idyos, tauyais uggkis.

34 And hi bine bysmria|>, and hi him
on spaeta)', and bine swinga|i ; and ofslea}?
bine, and he iirist on dam briddaii
da'ge.
35 Him da genealjrhton to lacobus
and Johannes, Zebedeis suna, and cwa'd-
011, Lnreow, we wyllaj', da^t dii us do,
swa liwwt 8wa we bidda}?.

im,

AVlia

wileits

36 f)a cwa?|) be, Hwaet wylle gj't da3t

ic iiic do 1
37 Da cwrcdon hi, Syle unc, daet wyt
sitton, on diuum wuldrc, an on dine

36 1[)

qaj)
tauyan mik igcps ?

Jesus

37 If

eis qe))un du imma, Fragif ugkis,
ei ains af tailiswon J)einai, yah aiiis af

I?

1

1

1

X. 26-37.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

223

thorw a nedlis y^e, than a riche man for
to entre in to the kyngdom of God.

26 Whiche wondriden more, seyinge
at hem selue, And who may be maad
saf?

27 And Jhesus biholdinge hem, seith
to hem, Anentis men it is impossible,
but not anemptis God ; for alle thingis
ben possible anemptis God.

28 And aftirward Petre bigan for to
seye to him, Loo ! we han left alle
thingis, and han sued thee.

29 Jhesus answeringe seith, Treuli I
seie to 50U, ther is no man that schal
leeue hous, or bretheren, or sistris, or
fadir, or modir, or sones, or feeldis for
me and for the gospel,

30 The which schal not taken an hun-
di-idfold so moche now in this tyme,
housis, and bretheren, and sistris, and
modris, and sones, and feldis, with per-
secuciouns, and in the world to comynge
euerlasting lyf.

thorowe the eye of an nedle, then for a
ryche man to entre into the kyngdom
of God.

26 And they were astonnyed out of
measure, sayinge betwene them selves.
Who then can be saved 1

27 Jesus loked apon them, and sayd.
With men it is vnpossible, but not with
God ; for with God all thinges are pos-
sible.

28 And Petre began to saye vnto hym,
Loo ! we have forsaken all, and have
folowed the.

29 Jesus answered and sayde, Verely
I saye vnto you, there ys no man that
hath forsaken housse, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or moder, or wyfe,
other chyldren, or londes, for my sake
and the gospelles,

30 Whych shall nott receave an houn-
dred foolde nowe in thys lyfe, houses,
and brethren, and sisters, and mothers,
and children, and londes, whith persecu-
cions, and in the worlde to come eternall
lyfe.

3

Forsoth many schulen be, the firste

3

Many that are fyrst shalbe last, and

the laste, and the laste the firste.

the last fyrst.

32 Forsothe thei weren in the weye
6ti3ynge to Jerusalem ; and Jhesus wente
bifore hem, and thei wondriden, and
And eftsoone Jhe-
folowinge dredden.
sus takinge to twelue, bygan to seye
to hem, what thingis weren to come to
him.

33 For lo ! we sti^en to Jerusalem,
and mannus sone schal be bitrayed to
the princes of prestis, and to scribis,
and to eldere men ; and thei schulen
dampne him ])y deeth, and thei schulen
bytake him to hethene men.

34 And thei schulen scorne him, and
byspcetc him, and bcctc him ; and thei
schulen sic him, and in the thriddc day
he schal rysc a3en.
35 And .James and Jon, Zcbcdccs sones,
camcn ny} to him, Kcyiiige, Maistir, we
wolen, that what eucrc we schulen axe,
thou do to vs.

36 And ho scidc to hem, What wolen

50 that I do to 3011
37 And thei seidcn, 3yue to vs, that
We sitten that oon at thi ri3thalf, and

32 They were in the waye goinge vppe
to Jerusalem ; and Jesus went before
them, and they were amased, and as
they folowed were affrayde. And Jesus
toke the xij. agayne, and began to tell
them, what thinges shulde happen vnto
him.

33 Beholde ! we goo vppe to Jerusa-
lem, and the sonne off man shalbe de-
lyvred vnto the hye preestes, and vnto
the scribbes ; and they shall condempne
hym to deeth, and shall delyvi'e hym to
the gentyls.

34 And they shall mocke hym, and
scourge him, and spit apon hym ; and
kill him, and the thirde daye he shall
rysc aganc.

35 And James and Jhon, the sons off
Zebcdc, cam vnto liym, snyiiigc, Muster,
wc woldc, that thou shuldest do for vs,
what soever wc desyre.

36 If

sayde vnto thorn. What woldc

ye I shiildc do vnto you 1

37 They sayd vnto liym, Graunt vnto
vs, that wc nuiyc sitt won on thy ryght

224

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

hleidnmeiii

|)cinai

sitaiwa, in

wuljiau

Jjeinanima.

38 i I? icsus qa)nih du im, Ni witu|)8
whis bidyats ; niagutsu (Irif^t^kan stikl,
]?anei ik driggka, yali daupcinai Jjizaiei
ik daupyada, ei daui)yaindau ?

39 Ij) eis qc))un du i'rama, Magu.

l]>
lesus qa|?uh du im, Swejjauh jjana stikl
i'k driggka driggkats, yah |)izai
|)anci
daupeinai, J^izaiei ik daupyada, [daup-
yandaj]^"

40 Ij) })ata du sitan af taihswon meinai
aij>|>au af hleiduniein nist mein du gi-
bau, alya J?aiinci manwij? was.

41 Yah gahausyandans |>ai taihun du-
gunnun uiiweryau bi lakobu yah lohau-
ncn.

42 \\> is atliaitands ins, qa}) du im,
AVitu)', J>atei [j^aici]^ jjuggkyand reikinon
jjiudom, gafrauyinond im, ip ))ai luikil-
ans ize jrawaldand im.

swydran healfe, and oder on dine wyn-
stran.

38 Da cwaej) se Haclend, Gyt nyton
hwaet g}i; bidda}> ; mage gyt driucan
done calic, de ic drince, and beon ge-
fullod on dam fulluhte, de ic beo ge-
fullod 1

39 Da cwaedon hi, Wyt magon. Da
cwaej? se Haelend, Gyt drincaj) done calic
de ic drince, gyt beoj) gefullode dam
fulluhte, de ic beo gefullod ;

40 S6|)lice nis hit na min inc to syl-
lenne diet gyt sitton on mine swydran
healfe odde on da wynstran, ac dam de
hit gcgearwod ys.

41 D.i gebulgon da tyne hi be lacobc

and lohaune.

42 Da clypode se H?clend hi, and
cwn^j), Wite ge, ditt da de on |>codum
dait hyra ealdras
ealdorscype habbaj),
anweald ofer lii habbajx

43 1]> ni swa siyai "in izwis, ak sa-
"vvliazuh saei wili wair}>an mikils in izwis,
siyai izwar andbahts,

44 Yah saei wili izwara wairjjan frum-

43 S6|)lice on eow hit nis swa, ac swa
hwylc swa wyle mid eow yldcst beon,
se by|> cower |)en,

44 And se de wyle on cow f^Tmest

ists, siyai all aim skalks.

beon, se by)? ealra f^cow.

45 Yah auk sunus mans ni qam, at
andbalityam, ak andbahtyan, yah giban
saiwala scina faur managans lun.

45 S6))lice ne com manncs sunu, da^t
him man {jenode, ac da't he jienode, and
his sawle sealdc for manegra alyscd-

46 Yah qomun in lairikon ; yah us-
paggandin imnia yain])ro, mi)) siponyam
Bcinaim, yah maiiagoin ganohai, sunus
Teimaiaus, Barteimaiaus, blinda, sat faur
wig du aihtron.

46 Da comon hi to Gericho ; and he
fcrde fram Gericho, and his leorning-
menegu, Timeus
cnihtas, and myeel
sunu, Bartimcus, siet blind, wid done
weg wa?dla.

nysse."*"

47 Yah gahausyands, |>atci Kesus sa
Nazoraius 1st, dugann hropyan, yah (p}mn,
Sunau Daweidis, lesu, armai mik.

47 Da he gehyrde, dtet hit w.ts se
da
Nazarenisca
clypian, and cwedan, llailend, Dauides
sunu, gcmiltsa me.

Ha?lend,

ongan

lie

48 Yah wliotidcdun imma managai, ci
filu mais hiopida,

ga|)ahaidedi ;
Sunau Daweidis, armai mik.

is

i[)

48 Da budon liim mancga, dxt he
siiwodc ; he cly])ode da dies de ma,
Miltsa me, Dauides sunu.

49 Yah gastandand.-^ Icsus liaihait at-
wopyan ina ; yah wopidedun |>ana blind-
an, qi|>andans (hi imma, prafstci |)uk,
urreis, wopei)) |)uk.

49 Da n?tst6d se TIcTlcnd and hct hine
clypian ; da sjcdon hi dam blindan, Beo
geheortra, and aris, se Haelend de clyp-

at).

^

;

X. 38-49.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

the tothir at the left, in thi glorie.

38 Forsothe Jhesus seith to hem, ^e
witen not what ^e schulen axe ; mown
5e drynke the cuppe, the which I am to
drynke, or be waischun with the bap-
tym, in which I am baptisid "l
39 And thei seiden to him, We mown.
Sothli Jhesus seith to hem, Treuli 50
schulen drynke the cuppe that I drynke,
and 5e schulen be waischun with the
baptym, in which I am baptisid ;

40 Sothli for to sitte at my ri3thalf or
lefthalf is not myn to 5yue to 50U, but
to which it is ordeyned.

TYNDALE, 1526.

225

honde, and the other on thy lyfte honde,
in thy glory.

3 8 Butt Jesus sayd vnto them. Ye wot
not what ye axe ; can ye dryncke of the
cuppe, that I shall drynke of, and be
baptised in the baptim, that I shalbe
baptised in *?

39 And they sayd vnto him, That we
Jesus sayde vnto them. Ye shall
can.
drynke off the cuppe that I shall drynke
of, and be baptised with the baptim,
that I shalbe baptised in

40 But to sitt on my right honde and
on my lifte honde ys not myne to geve,
but to them for whom it ys prepared.

41 And the ten heeringe hadden endig-
nacioun of James and John.

41 And when the .x. herde that they

began to disdayne at James and Jhon.

42 Sothli Jhesus clepinge hem, seith
to hem, 3e witen, that thei that semen
to liaue princehed on folkis, lordschipen'''
of hem, and the princes of hem han
power of hem.

43 Forsoth it is not so in 50U, but who
euere schal wolle be maad more, schal
be 30ure mynystre,

44 And who euere schal wolle be the

42 Butt Jesus called them vnto him,
and sayd to them. Ye knowe wele, that
they whych seme to beare rule amonge
the gentyls, raygne as lordes over them,
and they that be greate men amonge
them exercyse auctorite over them.

43 So shall it not be a monge you, but
wosoever of you wilbe greate amonge
you, shalbe youre minster,

44 And wosoever wilbe chefe, shalbe

firste in 30U, schal be seruaunt of alle.

servaunt vnto all.

45 Forwhi and mannis sone cam not,
that it schulde be mynystrid to him,
but that he schulde mynystre, and 3yue
his soule^ redempcioun^ for manye.

46 And thei camen to Jerico ; and
him goynge forth fro Jerico, and his
disci plis, and a ful moche cumpany of
peple, the sone of Tynioy, Barthymeus,
blynd, saat bisydis the weye beggynge.

47 The which whanne he hadde herd,
for it is Jhesus of Nazareth, bigan to
crie, and seye, Jhesu, the sone of Dauith,
hauc mercy on me.

48 And manye thretnyden Ijym, tliat
he aclmlde be stille ; and he criede
moclic more, Jhesu, the sone of Dauith,
haue mercy on mc.

49 And Jhesu stondingc comaundide
hym for to l>c clepid ; and thei clc[)idcn
the blynde man, sciynge to him, He thou
of bctere hertc, rysc vp, he clcpith thee.

45 For even the sonne of man came
nott, that other shulde minister vnto
hym, but to minister, and to geve his
lyfe for the redempcion of many.

46 And they cam to Hierico ; and as
he went oute off" Hierico, with his dis-
ciples, and a greate nombre of peoj)le,
Barthimeus, the sonne of Thimeus, which
was blynde, sate by the hye wayes sydo
beggynge.

47 And when he licrde, that it was
Jesus off Nazareth, he began to crye,
and to saye, Jesus, the sonne off David,
have mercy on me.

48 And many rebuked hyme, bo cause
he shulde hoolde is peace ; but he cryed
the moore u greate deale. Thou sonne
off' David, have mercy on me.
49 And Jesus stodc still and com-
maundcd hym to be called ; and they
(;iill('d the blynde, saynge vnto hym, Bo
off good comfort, ryse, he calleth the.

;

;

220

GOTHIC, 360.

50 1}>

IS, afwairpands wastyai scinai,

ushlaupancls (|aTn at Icsu.

51 Yah andliafyands

qaj) du imma
Icsus, AVlia wileis ci tauyau |)us?
1\>
sa blinda (|a|j du imma, lxal)baiinei, ei
ussaiwliau.

52 \\) icsus qa)> du imma, Ga^^, ga-
Yah sun-

laubcins |>ciiia ganasida jmk.
saiw ussawh, yah kiistida 'in wiga lesu.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

50 He cla, awearp his reaf, and for))-

ricsde and to him com.

51 Da cwae|; se Haelend, Hwset wylt
clii diet ic de do] Da cw8e)> he, Lureow,
d{ct ic gesco.

52 Da cw«TJ) se Heelend to him, Gii,
din geleaki de halne gedyde. And he
sona gescah, and him fyligde on wege.

Chap. XI.

i Yah bijje newha wcs-
un lairusalcm in Be}?sfagcin yah Bi|)-
aniin, at fairgunya Alewyin, iusandida
twaiis siponye scinaize,

2 Yah ([ajj du im, Gaggats "in haim j)0
wi|?rawair|)on iggqis ; yah sunsaiw inn-
gaggandans in jjo baurg bigitats fulan
gabundanana, ana })ammei nauh ainshun
manne ni sat ; andbindandans ina, at-
tiuhats.

3 Yah yabai whas iggqis qij'ai, Duwhe
qijjaits, jjatei Frauya jjis
iusandei]>

Jjata tauyats 1
gairnei]?, yah sunsaiw ina
hidre.

4 GaH|)un J)an, yah bigetuu fulan ga-

bundanana at (Jaura uta, ana gagga
yah andbundun ina.

Chap. XI.

i +Da he gcncalschtc
Ilicrusalem and Bcthania, to Oliuetes
dune, he sende his twegen leorning-
cnihtas,

2 And cwoej) to him, Faraj> to dam
castele de [ongen] inc ys ; and gyt dar
sona gemetaj) assan folan getigcdne, ofcr
dione nan man gyt ne siet ;
untigca}>
hine, and to me gelscdap.

3 And gyf hwa to inc hwa?t cwj'|',
his ueode,

secgaj), daet Drihten hfef[)
and he hinc sona hider laet.

4 And da hi lit-ferdon, hi gemetton
done folan ute, on twycenan, beforan
dura getigedne ; da untigdon hi hinc.

5 Yah sumai ))ize yainar standandane
qcjnin du im, Wlia tauyats, audbind-
and;nis })ana fuhin ?

6 I|) cis qcjjun du im, swaswe anabauj)

5 And sume de dar stodon dus saedon
him, Hwivt do gyt, done folan un-
tigcnde 1

6 Da cwaedon hi, swa se Hoclend unc

im Icsus ; yah lailotun ins.

bead ; and hi leton hi da.

7 Yah brahtcdun J)ana fulan at lesua,
yah galagidcdun ana wastyos seinos, yah
gasat ana ina.

8 Managai j)an wfistyom seinalm straw-
idcdun
ana wiga, sumai astans mai-
maitun us bagmam, yah strawidcdun
ana wiga.

9 Yali jmi fauragaggandans, hropido-
dun, <|il>iin(lans, Osanna, |)iu))ida sa qim-
anda in naniin Frauyins ;

10 jMu|>ido so ([imandci |>iudangardi in
namin attins unsaris Dawcidis ; Osanna
in hauhistyam.

7 Da lacddon hi done folan to dam
Hoplende, and hi hyra reaf on-alcdon,
and he on-sa*t.

8 Mancga liyra

reaf on done weg
strehton, sume da [bogas]^ of dam trcow-
um hcowon, and strcowodon on done
wcg.

9 And da de beforan codon, and da de
cwanlon dus, Osanna,
a»ftcr-fofgodon,
sy gcbletsod se de com on Drihtncs
naman

10 Si gcbletsod da^t rice de ct^n urcs
fanler Dauidcs ; Osanna on hcahncs-
sum.^

;
;

X. 50.-XLIO.] WYCLIFFE, 1.389.

TYNDALE, 1K26.

227

50 The which, his cloth cast away,

50 He threwe awaye his clooke, and

sturtinge cam to him.

51 And Jhesus answeringe seide to
him, What wolt thou I schal do to tiiee 1
The blynde man seide to him, Maistir,
that I se.

52 Sothli Jhesus seide to him, Go
thou, thi feith hath maad thee saaf.
And anon he syj, and suede him in the
weye.

roose and cam to Jesus.

51 And Jesus answered and sayd vnto
hym. What wilt thou that I do vnto
the ? The blynde sayde vnto hym, Master,
that Y myght see.

52 Jesus sayd vnto hym, Goo thy
waye, thy fayght hath saved the. And
by and by he receaved his sight, and
folowed Jesus in the waye.

Chap. XL i And whanne Jhesus
cam ny3 to Jerusalem and to Betanye,
to the mount of Olyuete, he sendith two
of his disciplis,

2 And seith to hem. Go ^e in to the
castel that is a^ens 50U ; and anon ^e
entrynge in thidur schulen fyude a colt
tyed, on the which non of men sat ^it
vnbynde 36, and bryng him.

3 And if ony man schal seie ony thing
^e, that he is nedeful to
to 30U, seie
the Lord, and anon he schal leeue him
hidur.

4 And thei goynge forth, founden a
colt boundeu byfore the 3ate with oute-
forth, in the meeting of tweye weyes
and thei vnbounden him.

5 And summe of men stondinge there
seiden to hem. What don 36, vnbynd-
inge the colt ]

6 And thei seiden to hem, as Jhesus
comaundide to hem ; and thei leften
hem.

7 And thei brou3ten the colt to Jhesu,
and thei puttiden to him her clothis,
and Jliesus sat vpon him.

8 Forsothe manye strcwiden her clothis
in the weye, sotheli othere men kittiden
bowis^ fro trees, and strewiden in tlie
weye.

9 And thei that wentcn biforc, and
that .sucdcn, cryeden, seyingc, Osanna,
blcssid in he that comcth in the name of
the Lord ;

10 Blcssid tljc kyngdom that comcth
of cure fadir Dauith ; Onanna in hi3tees.

Chap. XL

i And when they cam
nye to Hierusalem vnto Bethphage and
Bethani, be sydes mount Olivte, he sent
forth .ij. of his disciples,

2 And sayde vnto them, Goo youre
wayes into the toune that is over a-
gaynste you j and as sone as ye entre
into it ye shall fynde a coolte bounde,
where on never man sate ; loose hym,
and brynge hym bidder.
3 And if eny man saye vnto you, Why
do ye soo 1 saye, that the Lorde hath
neade of him, and streight waye he wyll
sende hym bidder.

4 They went their waye, and found a
coolte ty.ed by the dore with out, in a
place where two wayes mett ; and they
losed hym.

5 And divers of them that stode there
sayd vnto them ; What do ye, loosynge
the coolte 1

6 And they sayd vnto them, even as
Jesus had commaunded them ; and they
let them goo.

7 And they brought the coolte to Jesus,
auid caste their garmentes on hym, and
he sate apon hym.

8 And many spreede there garmentes
in the waye, other cutt doune braunclies
of tlie trees, and strawed them in the
waye.

9 And they that went before, and they
that folowed, cryed, saynge, llosianna,
IjlcHsed be he that comcth in the name
off the Lorde ;

10 Blessed be the kyngdom that com-
meth in the nainr; off hym that is Lorde
off oure father David ; llosianna in the
hycst.

*i 2

;

1

;

;

228

GOTHIC, 360.

II Yah ji^alai)) "in lairusaiiUvnia lesus,
yah 'in alh ; yah bisaiwliands alhi, at
andanahtya yu]>an wisandin wheilai, us-
iddya in BeJ>aiiiaD, mi]) jjaiin twalibim.

[St. Mark

ANGLO-SAXOX, 995.
1 1 And he eodc eta on Ilierosolima
temj)l ; and ealle jjing he besetawutle,
da sefen tima wa^s, he ferde to Beth-
auiam, mid his twelf leoming-cnihtum.

12 Yah iftumin dai^a, usstandandam

im us lk'|)aniin, jj;re(higs was.

13 Yali gasaiwhaiids smakkabagm fair-
ra|)ro habandan lauf, at'iddya, ei aufto
bigeti wha ana iinnia ; yah qimands at
ininia, ni waiht bigat ana iinnia^ uiba
lauf ; ni auk was mel smakkaue.

12 And odrum dsege, da hi ferdon

fram Bethania, bine hingrode.

13 DjI he feorran geseah an fic-treow
de leaf h?efde, he com, and sohte hwa'der
he dar on aht fiinde; da he him to com,
ne fiinde he dar, buton leaf anc ;
lice hit wa3S dais fic-treowes tima.

bo})-

14 Yah usbairands qa)) du 'irama, Ni
Jninasei|)S us |)us aiwmanna akran mat-
yai. Yah gahausidedun Jjai siponyos is ;

14 Da cwsej) he, Heononforj) on ec-
nesse ne ete senig man waestm of de.
And his leorning-cnihtas dset gehyrdon

1.(5 Yah iddyedun du lairusaulwmai.
Yah atgaggands lesus "in
alh, dugann
uswaii'pan j^ans fral)Ugyandans yah bug-
yandans in alh ; yah mesa skattyane,
yah sitlans j)ize frabugyandaue ahakiiu
uswaltida

15 Da comon hi eft to Iliemsalem.
And da he on dait tempi code, he on-
gan drifan of dam temple syllende and
bicgende ; and mynetera J>i ocu, and
heah-setlu de da culfran cypton he
tobra^c

16 Yah ni lailot, ei whas J>airhbcri kas

16 And he ne ge]iafode, daet senig man

J)airh |>o alh.

17 Yah laisida, qi[)ands du im, Niu
gamelij) i'st, patei razn mein razu bido
ij) yus gatawi-
liaitada allaim j^iudom ?
dcduj) ita du filigrya waidcdyane.

senig fa't }>urh du't temj)l bfOre.

17 And he da lacrende, dus cwii?|) to
him, Nis hit awriten, Daet miu bus
bij) genemned
fram ealluni
gebed-hus?
to
scea})ena scraefe.

s6[)lice ge dydon da?t

j^eodum

18 Yah gahausidedun })ai bokaryos yah
gudyanc anhuniistans, yah sokidedun
Avliaiwa inuna us(|istidedcina ; ohtedun
auk ina, unto alia managci sildaleik-
idedun in lais^inais 'is.

18 Da diera sacerda caldras and da
boceras dis gehyrdon, hi |)ohton hu hi
bine forspildon ; deh hi him adredon
bine, fordam call seo meuigu wundrode
be his hire.

19 Yah l)i))e andanahti war}', usiddya

19 And dii hit sefen wa?s, he code of

ut us |>izai baurg.

dajre ceastre.

20 Yah i'n maurgin faurgaggandans,
gasewhun j)ana smakkabagm [)aursyaua
us waurtim.

21 Yah gamunands Paitrus, qnj) du
imina, llabbei, sai ! smakkabagms jninei
fra(jast, ga))aursnoda.

20 On merigen d.i hi ferdon, hi ge-
sawon da't fic-treow foi*scruucen of dam
wyrtruman.

2

Da cw{u|) Petrus, Liireow, loca ! hii
forscranc diet fic-treow, de dii wyrig-
dest.

22 Yah andliafyands lesus qa]> du im,

22 Da cwa^}^ se Hrelend him and-

IIabaij> galaubein CJu))s ;

23 Amen auk <ji|)a izwis, ))iswhazuh ei
qi|>ai du |>amma fairgunya, Tshafei jnik,
yah wairp |»us in marein ; yah ni tuz-
weryai in
ga-

bairtiu seinamma, ak

swarigcnde, Habba}> Godes triiwan ;

23 Ic secge eow to soj^e, swa hwylc
swa cwy)> to disum miinte, Si du afyr-
retl, and on sae aworpen ; and on his
beortan ue twyna|), ac gelyfj), swa hwiet

h

6
5
2
1

;

4
5
3
2
7
1

;

XL 11-23.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

1

And he entride in to Jerusalem, in
to the temple ; and alle thingis seyn
aboute, whanne the our was now euen-
yng, he wente in
to Betanye, with
twelue.

1

And another day, whanne he wente

out of Betanye, he hungride.

13 And whanne he hadde seyn a fyge
tree afer hauynge leeuys, he cam, if
happily he schulde fynde ony thing
therynne ; and whanne he cam to it,
he fond no thing, out taken leeuys ; for
it was no tyme of fygis.

1

14 And Jhesus answeringe seide to it,
Now no more with outen ende ony man
ete fruyt of thee. And his disciples
herden ;

And thei camen to Jerusalem. And
whanne he hadde entrid in to the tem-
ple, he bigan for to caste out men sell-
inge and biggynge in the temple ; and
he turnyde vpsodoun the boordis of
chaungeris, and the chaieris of men sell-
inge culueris

1

TYNDALE, 1526.

229
And the Lorde entred into Hieru-
salem, and into the tem^^le ; and when
he had loked roundabout apon all
thinges, and nowe the even tyde was
come, he went out vnto Bethany, with
the twelve.

1

And on the morowe, when they were

come out from Bethany, he hungred.

1

And he spyed a fygge tree a farre
off havinge leves, and went to se whether
he myght fynde eny thinge there on ;
but when he cam there to, he foundc
for the tyme off
nothinge butt leves ;
fygges was nott yet.

1

And Jesus answered and sayd to it,
Never man eate frute of the here after
And his
whill the worlde stondith.
disciples herde it

1

And they cam to Hierusalem. And
Jesus went into the temple, and began to
cast out them which soolde and bought
in the temple ; and overthrewe the tabels
of the money chaungers, and the stoles
of them that soolde doves ;

1

And he suffride not, that ony man

16 And wolde not suffre, that eny man

schulde here a vessel thur3 the temple.

17 And he tau^te hem, seyinge, Wher
it is not writun, For myn hous schal be
clepid the hous of preiynge to alle folkis 1
forsoth 3e han maad it a den of theues.

18 The which thing herd, the princes
of prestis and scribis sou^ten hou thei
schulde leese him j forsoth thei dreden
hym, for al the cumpanye of peple won-
dride on his tcching.

19 And whanne euenyng was maad,

he wente out of the citec.

20 And whanne thei passidcn cerly,
thei 8y3en the fige tree maad drye fro
the rootis.

21 And Pctrc hauynge mynde, scide
to him, Maistir, lo ! tlie fyge tree, whom
thou cursed ist, hath drycd vp.

22 And Jhesus answeringe scith

to

him, Hauc 3c the fcitli of God ;

23 Trculi I scic to 30U, that who cucre
scith to this hil. Take, and sendc in to
the see ; and doutith not in his hertc,
fiji- what cucrc he schal
but bilcuctli,

caried a vessell thorowe the temple.

1

And he taught, saynge vnto them,
Ys it not written, Howe that myne
housse shalbe called the liousse of prayer
vnto all nacions 1 butt ye have made it
a deen of theves.

18 And the scribes and hye prestes
herde yt, and sought howc to distroyc
him ; for they feared hym, be cause all
the peple marveld at his doctrine.

19 And when even was come, he went

out of the cite.

20 And in the mornynge as they passed
by, they sawe the fygge tree dryed vpp
by the rotes.

21 And Peter rcmonibrod, and sayd
vnto hym, Master, l)eh()lde ! the fygge
tree, wliich tliou curscdes, ys widdred
awaye.

2 2 And Jesus answered and sayde vnto

them, Have confidcns in God ;

23 Vercly I syc vnto you, that whoso-
ever hIuiU saye vnto this mountayiii!,
Take awaye thy si He, and cast thy silfe
in to the sec ; and kIkiII not waver in

230

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

Inubyai, jjata
wair))i|> iinma, })iswliali ))ci 4i]>i}>-

)\atei

ci

qi|)iK gagaggi}>,

swa he cwyj), gewurde dis,
wyrj>.

dait

ge-

24 Du})|)G qi|)a izwis, allata |)iswliah j>ei
bidyandans sokcij), galaubeij? })atei iiimi]),
yah >vair})i]j izwis.

24 Fordam ic eow secgc, swa liwwt
swa ge gyrnende biddaj), gelyfaj? diet go
hit onfoj^, and hit eow becyraj).

25 Yah j)an standaij? bidyandans, aflet-
aij>, yabai wlia habaij) wijra whana, ei
yah atta "izwar sa in himinam, aflctai
izwis missadedins izwaros.

26 ij) yabai yus ni afleti]?, ni j^au atta
izwar sa in himinam, afletij? izwis mis-
sadedins izwaros.

27 Yah iddycdun aftra du lairusaulw-
Yah in alh wharbondin imma,
mai.
atiddycdun du imma jjai auhumistans
gudyans, yah bokaryos, yah sinistans,

25 And donne ge standaj) eow to ge-
biddenne, forgifa}>, gif ge hwajt agc'n
senigne habba]?, d?et eow eower synna
forgyfc, eower heofouHca fieder se do
on heofonum ys.

26 Gyf ge ne forgyfa)i, ne eow eower

synna ne forgyf)?, eower fteder

.

.

.

27 Da com he eft to Hierusalcm. And
da lie on dam temple eode, him to ge-
nealschton da heah-sacerdas, and bocer-
as, and ealdras,

28 Yah qojjun du imma, In whamma
waldufnye ))ata tauyis 1 yah wlias ]jus
})ata waldufni atgaf, ei ))ata tauyis ?

28 And dus cwsedon. On hwylcum
anwealde dest dii das j^ing] and hwa
sealdc de disne anweald, dret dii dis

29 1|) lesus andhafyands qaj) du im,
Frailina yah ik izwis ainis waurdis, yah
andhafyij) mis, yah qi})a izwis, in wham-
ma waldufnye ])ata tauya.

29 Da cw£e|) se Hiclend, And ic ahsige
eow unre sprsece, andswaria)> me, and ic
secge eow donne, on hwylcum anwealde
ic dis do.

d:. ?

30 Daupeins lohannis uzuli himina
"vvas, Jjau uzuh mannam 1 andhafeij) mis.

31 Yali j)alitcdun du sis misso, qij^and-
ans, Yabai (ji))am us liimina, qi}>ij? aj^jjan,
Duwhc ni galaubideduj) imma ;

32 Ak qijmm us mannam, ulitedun )>o
managcin ; allai auk alukyo habaideduu
loliannen, |)ntei bi sunyai ])rauf('t('s was.
33 ^'ah andliafyan(hins (irj)un du Jesua,
Yah andhafyands lesus qaj)
Ni witum.
(hi im, Nih ik izwis qijia, in whanuna
waldufnye |>ata tauya.

30 Hweder wses lohanncs fulluht do
of heofone, de of mannum? andswaria)>
me.

31 Da |)ohton hi, and cwa?don betweox
him, Gif we sccgaj) of heofone, he segj)
us, Hwi ne gelyfdc ge him ;

32 Gif we secgaj) of mannum, we on-
draeda}> dis folc ; ealle hi ha?fdon lohan-
nem, da^t he wiere sojilice witega.
33 Da andswaredon hi dam Ifivlende
and cwjcdon, We nyton.
Da cwa^J) se
Halend, Ne ie eow ne secge, on hwylc-
um anwealde ic diis j)ing do.

Chap. XTI.

I Dii ongan he him big-
gayukom (ii|>an.
spel reccan. Sum man him plaiitode
manna, yah bisatida ina fa|>om, yah us- I win-gcard, and bctynde liine, and dcalf
grof dal uf mesa, yah gatimrida kelikn.
anne sen]*, and gctimbrode aenne stypel,

i Yah dugann im in
ussatida

CiTAP. XII.

Weinni^'ard

XI. 24.-XII. I.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

231

seye, be it maad, it sclial be maad to
liim.

24 Therfore I seie to 50U, alle thingis
what euere thingis 56 preiynge schulen
axe, bileue 56 that ^e schulen take, and
thei schulen come to 50U.

25 And whanne ^e schulen stonde for
to preiC; for^yue ^e, if ^e han ony thing
a^ens ony man, that and ^oure fadir
that is in heuenes, for3yue to 30U 50ure
synnes.

26 That if 5e schulen

not for^yue,
neither 5oure fadir that is in heuenes,
schal for3yue 30U 3oure synnes.

27 And eftsoone thei camen to Jeru-
salem. And whanne he walkide in to
prestis, and
the
scribis, and eldere men camen ni3 to
him,

temple, the

hi3este

28 And seien to him. In what power
doist thou thes thingis 1 or who 3af to
thou do thes
thee this power, that
thingis ]

29 Forsothe Jhesus answeringe seith
to hem. And I schal axe 30U o word,
and answere 3e to me, and I schal seie
to 30U, in what power I do thes thingis.

his herte, butt shall beleve, that thoose
thinges which he sayeth, shall come to
passe, what soever he sayeth, shalbe done
vnto him.

24 Therfore I saye vnto you, what
soever ye desyre when ye praye, beleve
that ye shall have it, and it shalbe done
vnto you.

25 And when ye stond and praye, for-
yeve, yf ye have eny thinge agaynste eny
man, that youre father also which is in
heven, maye foryeve you youre tres-
pases.

26

27 And they cam againe to Hierusa-
lem. And as he walked in the temple,
there cam to hym the hye prestes, and
the scribes, and the seniours,

28 And sayd vnto hym, By what auc-
torite doest thou these thinges 1 and
who gave the this auctorite, to do these
thinges 1

29 Jesus answered and sayde vnto
them, I wyll also axe of you a certeyne
thynge, and answere ye me, and I wyll
tell you, by what auctorite I do these
thinges.

30 Whether was the baptym of John
of heuenCj or of men ? answere 36 to me.

30 Whether was the baptim of Jhon

from hevin, or of men 1 answer me.

31 And thei thou3ten with inne hem
selue, seiynge, If we schulen seie of
lieuene, he schal seie to vs, Whi ther-
fore bileuen 3e not to him ;

32 If we schulen seie of men, we dreden
tlie peple ; for alle men hadden John,
for he was verily a prophete.
33 And thei answeringe seycn to Jhesu,
We witen neuere. And Jhesu answer-
inge seith to hem, Neither I seie to 30U,
in what power I do thes thingis.

31 And they thought in them selves,
saynge, Yf we shall saye from heven,
he will saye, Why then did ye not beleve
hym ;

3 2 But yf we shall saye of men, then
feare we the people ; for all men counted
Jhon, that he was a vcri prophctt.

33 And they answered and sayd vnto
Jesu, We cannot tell. And Jesus an-
swered and sayd vnto them, Nether wyll
I tell you, by what auctorite I do these
thyngcs.

Chap. XII.

i And Jliesus ])igan to
speke jmrably."'' A man plauntide a
vync3erd, and puttidc a])OUtc an lieggc,
and dalf a lake, and bildide a tour, and

CriAP. XIT.

I And he began to
A
Ki)cake \uU) them in Himilitudes.
certaync man j)lanted a vineyardc, and
compascd it witli an hedge, and ordeyn-

1

;

;

2
1

;

232

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

yali anafalli ina waurstwyain, yali aflaij)

alya})

and gesctte hine mid eor)>-tilium, and
ferde on clj'codignysse

2 Yali Vnsandida du j>aiin waurstwyam
at iiicl skalk, ei at j>aini -svaurstwyain
ncmi akranis j)is wciuagardis.

2 Dil sende he to ctam tilium his })Cow
on tide, dxt he da?s win-geardes waistm
oufenge.

3 J|) CIS nimandans ina usbluggwuiij

3 Da swungon hi dsene, and forlcton

yah iiisandidediin laushandyan.

hine idel-hende.

4 Yah aftra insandida du im an])arana
skalk, yah jjana staiuam wairpandans
gaaiwiskodedun, yah haubij) wundan
brahtcduu, yali insandidedun ganaitid-
ana.

5 Yah aftra 'insandida anjjarana, yah
yainana afslohun, yah managans an]>ar-
ans, sumans usbliggwaudans, sumanzuh
J>an usqiniandans.

6 panuh nauhj^anuh ainana sunu aig-
ands liiibana sis, insandida yah [^ana du
ini spcdistana, qijninds, patei gaaistand
sunu meinana.

7 1|) yainai jjai waurstwyans qc|)un du

sis niisso, patei sa ist sa arbinumya
hiryi}) usqimam imma, yah unsar wair|)i}>
J>ata arbi.

8. Yah undgrcipandans "ina, usqcnum,
yah uswaurpun imma ut us jnininia
wcinagarda.

9 AVha null tauyai fr.auya ])is wciuagard-
(^iniij), yah uscpstci)? |nms waurst-
is ?
wyans, yah gibij) J>ana weinagard an-
)>araim.

10 Nih J)ata gamelido

ussuggwuj).
Stains }>amniei uswaurpun j)ai timryaus,
sail waij) du haubida waihstins ?

4 And eft he him sende odcrne ))eow,
and hi done on heafde gewuudodou, and
mid tconum geswencton.

5 And eft he him sumne sende, and
hi da^ne ofslogon, and manega oclre,
sume hi beoton, sumc hi ofslogon.

6 Da hnefde he dil gyt senne Icofostne
nchstan him
sunu, da sende he a^t
dnene, and cwa-j), Witodlice minne sunu
hig forwandiaj).

7 Da cwscdon da tilian him bctweonan.
Her is se jTfenuma ; uton ofsleau hine,
donne bi|> lire seo yrfweardnes.

8 III dt ofslcgon hine, and wurpon

widutan done wiu-geard.

9 ITwa:'t dc|> dfcs win-geardcs hlaford ?
He cyni)>, and forde}» da tiligcan, and
sylj) odron done win-geard.

10 Ne r.Tdde ge dia gewrit, Se stin
dc da wyrlitan awurpon, des ys ge-
worden on diere hyrnan heafod ?

1

Frani Frauyin war)) sa, yah ist

1

Dis ys fram Drihtne gewordcn, and

sildalciks in augani unsaraini.

12 Yah sokidcdun ina undgreipan, yah
ohtcdun j)0 nianagein ; fro))un auk J>atci
du im |>o gayukoii qaj) ; yah aUctaiulans
ina, gali])un.

13 Yah insandidedun du imma sumai
|>izc Faroisaic yah llerodianc, ci ina
ganutcina waiu'da.

14 1|) cis qimandans qcjnin du imma,
Laisari, witnni jiatci sunyoins is. yah ni
kara Jnik manshun ; ni auk saiwhis Vn
nndwair))ya manno, ak bi sunyai wig
Gu])S
kaisaragild

Skuldu ist

laiscis.

hit is wundorlic on liron eagum.

1

Da snicadon hi da't hi gefcngon

hine, and hi ondrcdon da menigii ;
oncneowon da da^t lie dis bigspcl to
him sacdc ;
da, and hine
forlcton. ''^

lii fcrdou

lii

13 Da sendon hi to him sume of
hi

an»l Hcrodianum, da^t

riiariseum
bofcn^'on hine on his wordc.

14 Da comon lii and dus mid facnc
cwivdon, Larcow, we witon da^t dii cart
so|>ia}st, and dii ne rccst be a?ncgum
men ; ne bcsceawast dii manna ansyne,
ac du Godes weg lacrst on 86|)fajstnysse.

1

2
1

XII. 2-14-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

233

it to erthe tilieris, and wente

hirecle
forth in pilgryinage j

2 And sente to tlie erthe tilieris in
tjrae a seruaunt, that he schulde receyue
of the fruyt of the ^7'ne3erd at the erthe

tilieris.

3 The whiche beten him takun, and

leften him voyde.

4 And eftsoone he sente to hem a
nother seruaunt, and thei woundiden
him in the heed, and ponyscheden with
chidingis.'*'

ed a wyne presse, and bilt a toure in
hytt, and lett it out tohyre vnto husbande-
men, and went into a straunge countre

2 And when tyme was come he sentt
to the tennauntes a servaunt, that he
myght of the tenauntes receave of the
frute of the vyneyarde.

3 And they caught hym and bett hym,

and sentt hym agayne empty.
4 And mooreover he sentt vnto them
another servaunt, and at hym they cast
stones and brake hys heed, and sent
him agayne all to revyled.

5 And eftsoone he sente another, and
thei slowen him, and othere mo, betynge
summe, but sleynge othere.

5 And agayne he sentt another, and
hym they kylled, and many other, beet-
ynge some, and kyllinge some.

6 Therfore 5it he hauynge a sone most
dereworth, and to hem he sente him the
laste, seyinge. For by hap thei schulen
schame my sone.'''

7 Forsothe the tenauntis seyden to
hem self,^ This is the eier ; come 56, sle
we him, and the eritage schal be oure.

8 And thei takynge him, castiden out

withoute the vyne3erd, and slowen.

6 Yet had he one sonne whom he loved
tenderly, him also sent he att the last
vnto them, sayinge. They wyll feare my
Sonne.

7 Butt the tenauntes sayde with in
themselves, Thys ys the heyre ; come,
lett vs kill him, and the inheritaunce
shalbe oures.

8 And they toke him, and killid him,

and cast hym out of the vyneyarde.

9 Therfore what schal the lord of the
vyne3erd do 1 He schal come, and leese
the tenauntis, and 3yue the vyne3erd to
othere.

10 Wher 36 han not rad this scripture.
The stoon the which men bildinge han
dispisid, this is maad in to the heed of
the corner ?

9 What shall then the lorde of the
vyneyarde do 1 He will come, and dis-
troye the tenauntes, and let out the
vyneyarde to other.

10 Have ye nott redde thys scripture,
The stoone which the bylders did refuse,
ys made the chefe stoone in the corner'?

1

This thing is maad of the Lord, and

1

Thys was done off the Lorde, and

is wondirful in oure y3cn.

12 And thei 80U3tcn for to holde him,
and thei dreden the cumpanye of pcplc ;
Bothli thei knewen for to hem he seide
this parable ; and liim left, thei wcntcn
away.

13 And thei senden to him summe of
the I'arisccs and Erodians, for to take
hym in word.

14 The whiche comyngc seyn to hym,
Maistir, we witon for tliou crt sothfast,
and rcckist not of ony man ;
sotlily
neither thou secst in to face of man,
but tliou tcchist the wcy of (iod in

ys merveyllous in oure eyes.

1

And they went about to take hym,
butt they feared the people ; for they
perccaved that he spake that similitude
agaynst them ; and they left hym, and
went their waye.

13 And they sent vnto hym certayno
off the Phariscs with IFcrodes scrvauntcs,
to take hym in hys wordcs.

14 And as sone as they were como
they siiyd vnto hym, Master, avc known
tliat tliou arte true, and carestc for wo
man ;
for tijou consydercste nott the
dcgre off men, butt teacheste the waye

1

7
1

;

234

GOTHIC, 360.
giban Kaisara? ....

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

A'lyfjj gaful to syllanne dam Casere 1

15 pau niu pjibaima?

1|> lesus ga-
saiwliamls I'ze 1 lutein, qaj) dii ifm, Wha
atbairij? mis skatt, ei ga-
iiiik fraisij)?
saiwhau.

15 Hwseder de we ne sylla}>'?

Da
cwj,e|) he, and heora lot-wrenceas wiste,
H\vi fandige ge min? bringaj' me done
peuing, dait ic bine geseo.

16 I]j eis atbcrun.

Yali qa]) clu im,
Wilis 'ist sa manlcika, yah so unfar-
1|) eis qe})Uii dii mima, Kais-
mcleins ?

16 Da brohton hi him. Da ssede he
him, Hwses is deos anlicnys, and dis
gewrit?

Ill cwaedon, Does Caseres.

aris.

17 Yali andliafyands lesus qa|) du 'im,
Usgibi}> |)0 Kaisaris Kaisara, yah |)0
Yah sildaleikidedun ana
Gu|;s Gu])a.

]?amina.

18 Yah atiddyedun Saddukaieis du
qij;and usstass ni wisan,

iniiiia,
yah frehun ina, qi})andans,

jjaiei

19 Laisari, Moses ganiclida unsis, j^atei
yabai whis bro})ar gadau)?nai, yali
bi-
lei|>ai qenai, yah barne ui bileij^ai, ei
niinai bro|;ar is \>o qen is, yah ussatyai
barna brojn- scinamnia.

20 Sibun brojjrahans wesun ; yah sa
frumista nam qen, yah gaswiltands, ni
bilaij) fraiwa.

1

Da cwsej) se H?elend to him, A'gyfaj)
dam Casere da J)ing de does Caseres
synd, and Gode da de Godes synd.
Da wundrodon hi be dam.

18 Da comon him to

Saducei, da
seega}) diet aerist ne sy, and bine uh-
sodon, and dus cwaedon,

19 Lareow, Moyscs us \vrat, gif hw.TS
brodor dead bi}), and laef}) his wif, and
najfj) nan beam, da?t his brodor nime
his wlf, and his brodor saed wecce.

20 Eornostlice seofon gebrodru waeron
and se aeresta nam wif, and wearj) dead,
na laefedum saede.

2

Yah an])ar nam })0, yah gadau))noda,
Yah |>ridya

yah ni sa bilai|> fraiwa.
samaleiko.

2

And da nam se oder hi, and wear|>
Gelice so

dead, ne se saed ne lacfde.
|?ridda.

22 Yah ncmun ])0 samaleiko }iai sibun,
Si)edumista al-

yah ni bili|)un fraiwa.
laize gas wait yah so qens.

23 In )>izai usstassai, |>an usstandand,
|)ai auk

"Nvharyamma ize wairj)i{) <|cns 1
sibun aihtedun ])0 du qenai.

22 And ealle seofon hi ha^fdon, and
Ealra a;ftemest da

sacd ne laefdon.
foij>fcrdc dat wif.

23 On dam aeriste,

. hwylces dara scofona bij) da^t

wif? hi ealle hi hajfdon.

24 Yah andhafyands lesus qa[> du im,
Niu du|)C airzyai siyuj), ni kunnandans
mela, nih maht Gu})s ?

24 Da andswarode him se ITaclond, Ilii
ne dwcliga}> ge, fordam de ge nyton da
halgan gewritu, ne Godes mivgen 1

25 AUis j'an usstandand us daujmim,
ni liugand, ni Huganda, ak sind swc
aggilyus ]^ai in himinam.

25 S6})lice donne hi of deajie arisa)), ne
hi synd

hi, ne ne glftiaji, ac

wifia)'
swylce Godes euglas on heofonum.

26 A|)|)an bi daujmns, j^atci urrcisand,
niu gakunnaidedu}) ana bokom Mosezis,
ana aiwhatundyai, whaiwa inima qn|>
Gu|>, qijmnds, Ik im Gu|) Abrahamis,
yah GuJ) Isakis, yah lakobis ?

26 Be dam deadum, da^t hi arlson, ne
ncdde ge on Moyses bee, hii God to
him cwR»}>, ofer done gorst-beam, Ic com
Abrahames God, and Isaaces God, and
lacobcs God ?

27 Nist Gu}) dau}n\ize, ak qiwaize;

27 Nys God deadra, ac he ys lybbcnd-

;

XII. 1 5-27-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

235

treutlie.

Is it leefful for to 3yue tribute

to Cesar? ....
\ 15 Or we schulen not 5yue 1 The which
witinge her priuey falsnesse, seith to
hem, What tempten ^e me ? brynge 56
to me a peny, that I se.

16 And thei offriden to him.

And he
; seith to hem, Whos is this ymage, and
Thei seien to him,
the in wrytinge 1
Cesaris.

17 Forsothe Jhesus answeringe seith
to hem, Therfore 5elde ^e to Cesar that
ben of Cesar, and to God tho thingis
that ben of God. And alle wondriden
ion hira.

18 And Saducees, that seyen no resur-
ecioun to be, camen to him, and axiden
him, seyinge,
[ 19 ^laistir, Moyses wroot to vs, that
[if the brother of a man were deed, and
[lefte a wyf, and lefte not sones, his bro-
ther take his wyf, and reyse vp seed to
his brothir.

20 Therfore seuene britheren weren

and the firste took a wyf, and is deed,
no seed left.

21 And the secunde took hir, and he
is deed, and neither this lefte seed. And
the thridde also.

22 And seuene tooken hir, and lefte not
geed. And the womman the laste of alle
is deed.

23 Thanne in the rcsureccioun, whanne
thei schulen rise a3en, whos wyf of these
Bchal sche be ] sothly seuene hadden hir
wyf.

24 And Jhesus answeringe seith to
hem, Wher 30 erren not therfore, not
knowinge the
nother the
vertu of God ?

scripturis,

25 Forsothe whanne thei scliulen rise
SL'^en fro deed rnen, neither thei wedden,
nother ben wcddid, but thei schulen be
as aungcls of God in heucnes.

26 Sothli of deed men, that thei ryscn
a^ein, lian 3c not rad in the book of
Moyses, on the bousche, hou God seidc
to him, Hciyngc, I am God of Abraham,
and God of Ysaac, and (;rod of Jacob?

27 Tie is not God of dccdc men, but

off God truly.
tribute to Cesar, or nott ?

Ys yt laufull to paye

15 Ought we to geve, or ought we
nott to geve ? He knewe their dis-
simulacion, and sayd vnto them, Why
tempte ye me ? brynge me a peny, that
I maye se yt.

16 And they brought hym one. And' he
sayde vnto them. Whose ys thys ymage,
and superscripcion 1 And they sayde
vnto hym, Cesars.

17 And Jesus answered and sayde
vnto them. Then geve to Cesar that
which belongeth to Cesar, and geve God
that which perteyneth to God. And
they raervelled att hym.

18 And the Saduces cam vnto hym,
which saye there is no resurrection, and
they axed hym, sayinge,

19 Master, Moses wroote vnto vs, yff
eny mans brother dye, and leve hys wyf
behynde him, and leve no chyldren, that
then hys brother shulde take hys wyfe,
and reyse vppe seed vnto his brother.

20 There were seven brethren ; and
the fyrst toke a wyfe, and when he dyed,
leeft no seede behinde hym.

21 And the seconde toke her, and
dyed, nether leeft he eny seede. And
the thyrde lyke wyse.

22 And seven had her, and leeft no
Last of all the

seed behynde them.
wyfe dyed also.

23 In the resurrecion then, when they
shall ryse agaync, whose wyfe shall she
be of them ? for seven had her to wyfe.

24 Jesus answered and sayde vnto
them. Are ye not ther fore deceavcd,
be cause ye knowc not the scryptures,
nether the power of God ?

25 For when they shall ryse agaync
from deeth, they nether mary, nor arc
marycd, butt arc as the angels which
are in hevcn.

26 As touchynge the deed, that thoy
shall ryse agayne, have ye nott redde in
the boke oil" Moses, howe, in the busshe,
God spake vnto him, sayinge, I am tho
God of Abraham, and the God of Ysiiac,
and tli(! Cilod of Jacob ?

27 He is not the God of the deed, butt

;

;

;

236

GOTHIC. 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

a))|5an }^is filu airzyai siyu]>.

ra ; soj^licc swyde go dweligca)>.^

28 Yah duatj^anfpjands ains j^ize bok-
aryc. p^aliausyands ins saniana sokyand-
aiis, gasaiwliaiids Jjatei waila im aiidhof,
i'na, wliarya ist allaizo anabusne
frail

frumista.

28 Da gcncaUHite him jin of dam
bocerum, c!e gehyrde hi smeagendc, and
gcseah diet he him wcl andswarode, and
ahsode bine, hwset waere ealra beboda
msest.

29 I\t ifesus andhof imma, |)atei frum-
aiiabusns, Hausei, Israel,

ista
Fraiiya Giij? unsar Fraiiya ains I'st

allaizo

30 Yah friyos Fraiiyan Guj) j^cinana us
allanima hairtiu jjeinamma, yah us allai
saiwalai |)cinai, yah us allai galuigdai
So
Jjeinai, yah us allai mahtai j^eiuai.
frumista auabusns.

31 Yah an)>ara galcika }nzai, Friyos
silban.

ncwhundyan |?cinana swe J)uk
Maizei jjaim an})ara anabusns nist.

29 Da andswarode he him, Daet is da?t
maeste bebod ealra, Isralicl, gehyr, ume
Drihtcn God he is an God ;
30 And lufa dinne Drihtcn God of calre
dinre heortan, and of ealre dinrc sawle,
Galium dinum mode, and of callum din-
um ma'geue.
fyrmeste
bebod.

Dset is

diet

31 S6|)lice is oder dissum gclic, Lufa
Nys

dinne nehstan swa de sylfne.
oder mare bebod.

32 Yah qa)> du imma sa bokareis,
"Waila, laisari, bi sunyai qast ; J)atei ains
ist, yah nist an))ar, alya imma

32 Da cwaej? se bocerc, Larcow, well
du on s6[)e cwscde ; daet an God is, and
nys oder, butan him

33 Yah |)ata du friyon ina us allamma
hairtin, yah us allamma fra|)ya, yah us
allai saiwalai, yah us allai mahtai, yah
jiata du friyon ncwhundyan swe sik
silban, managizo ist allaim j^aim ala-
brunstim yah saudim.

34 Yah lesus gasaiwhands ina |)atei
frodaba andhof, qa|j du imma, Ni fairra
Yah ainshun
is jjiudangardyai GuJjs.
f»anasei|>s ni gadaursta ina fraihnan.

33 And daet he si gelufod of calre
heortan, and of eallum andgyte, and of
ealre sawle, and of calre strcngj^c, and
lufigcan his nehstan swa bine sylfne,
da?t is mare eallum onStTgdnyssum and
offrungum.

34 Da se Hselend gescah diet he bim
wisb'ce andwj'rdc, he sacde him, Ne cart
du fcor fram Godes rice. And bine ne
dorste nan man acsian.

35 Yah andhafyands lesus qaj),

lais-
yandsin alh,AVliaiwaqi|iand |)ai bokaryos,
jnitt'i Christus sunus ist Dawoidis ?

35 Da cwa?}j se Hadcnd, on dam tem-
ple laercnde, IIu sccgaj) da boceras, da't
Crist sy Dauidcs sunu ?

36 Rilba auk Dawcid qaj? in Ahmin
Wcihamma, QiJM}) Frauya du frauyin
mcinamma, Sit af tailiswon mcinai, unto
ik galagya fiyands |)cinans fotubaurd
fotiwc I'cinaizc.

37

Silba

raihtis Dawcid qi|^i|' ina
frauyan, yali wlia|)ro imma sunus ist?
\i\]\ alia so managci hausidedun imma
gabauryuba.

38 Yah <}a|) du im in laiscinui scinai,
Saiwhij) faura ....

36 Dauid sylf cwa?|i to dam Ilalgan
Gaste, Drihtcn cwa'ji to minum drihtnc.
Site on mine swydran hcalfc, od ic
dine fynd asette to fot-sccamole dinra

fota.
37 Dauid sylf ncmde bine driliten,
and hwanon is lie his sunul And mycel
menegu bine luflice gehyrde.

38 Da sjcdc he liim on his liire, "War-
niaji fram bocerum, da wylla}> on ge-
gy rlum gdu, and beon on straetum
grete,

;

XII. 28-38.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

237

God of lyuynge men ; tlierfore 50 erren
moche.

28 Aud oon of the scribis, that hadde
herd hem sekynge to gidere, cam 1115,
and seyinge that he hadde wel answerid
liem, axide hym, which was the firste
maundement of alle.

29 Jhesus answeride to him, that the
firste of alle comaundementis is, Heere,
Israel, the Lord thi God is oon ;

30 And thou schal loue the Lord thi
God of al thin herte, and of al thi soule,
and of al thi mynde, and of al thi vertu.''"
This is the firste maundement.

31 Forsothe the secunde is lyk to this,
Thou schalt loue thi nei5ebore as thi
Ther is non othir maundement
silf
more than these.

3 2 And the scribe seith to him, Maister,
for o

in treuthe thou hast wel seid ;
God is, and ther is non, out taken him

33 And that he be loued of al herte,
and of al thou^t,^ and of al vndirstond-
inge, and of al the soule, and of al
strengthe, and to loue the nei3ebore as
him silf,
is more than alle brend of-
fringis and sacrificis.
34 Jhesus forsothe

seyinge that he
hadde answerid wysely, seide to him,
Thou ert not fer fro the kyngdom of
And now no man durste axe
God.
him.

35 And Jhesus answeringe seide, tcch-
inge in the temple, Tlierfore how seyn
Bcribis, Crist for to be the
sone of
Dauith ?

36 To whom Dauith him silf seide in
the Hooly Gost, The Lord seide to my
lord, Sitte on my ri3thalf, til I putte
thin enemyes the stool of thi feet.

37 Tlierfore Dauith liim silf scith him
a lord, and wherof is he his sone ] And
moche cumpany gladli herde him.

.•58 And he scido to hem in his tcching,
Be 3c war of Hcribis, that w<;len wandre
in stoolis, and be sulutid in chcpinge,

the God of the livynge ; ye are therfore
greatly deceaved.

28 And there cam won off the scrybes,
and when he had herde them disputyno-e
to gedder, and perceaved that he had
answered them well, he axed hym, which
is the fyrste of all the commaunde-
mentes.

29 Jesus answered hym, The fyrste of
all the commaundementes is, Heare,
Israhel, oure Lorde God is wone Lorde ;
30 And thou shaltt love thy Lorde
God with all thy hert, and with all thy
soule, and with all thy mynde, and with
all thy strengthe.
This is the fyrste
commaundement.

31 And the seconde is lyke vnto this,
Thou shalt love thy neghbour as thy
There is none other commaunde-
silfe.
ment greater then these.

32 And the scribe sayde vnto hym,
Well, master, thou hast sayde the truthe
thatt there ys one God, and that there
is none but he ;

33 And to love hym with all the herte,
and with all the mynde, and w^ith all
the soule, and with all the strengthe,
and to love a mans nehbour as hym silfe,
ys a greater thynge then all holocaustes
and sacrifises.

34 And when Jesus sawe howe that he
answered discretly, he sayd vnto hym.
Thou arte nott farre from the kyngdome
of God. And no man after that durst
axe hym eny question.

35 And Jesus answered and sayd, teach-
ynge in the temple, Howe saye the
scribes, that Christ is the sonne oft'
David ?

36 For David hym silfe inspyred with
the Holy Goost sayd, The Lorde sayde
to my lorde, Sytt on my right hondc,
tyll I make thyne cncmys thy fote stole.

37 Then David hym silfe callcth hym
lorde, and by what meanes ys he then
his Sonne ? And moche people herde
hym gladly.

3H And he sayd vnto them in his doc-
trine, J>e ware off the scribes, which
love to goo in longe clothyngc, and lovo
salutacions in the market places,

238

GOTUIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995. [St. Mark

;

39 And on fyrmcstum lareow-sctlum
sittan on gesamnun^um, and da fyrmcst-
an sell on gebcorscipum ;

40 Da dc wudewena bus forswclgal>,
mid lieora langsuman gebcde ; da ouf6)>
lengestne dom.

41 Da siet se Hij^lcnd ongen done toll-
sceamol, and geseah Ini diet folc liyra
feoh torfode on done toll-sceaniul; and
manega welige torfodon fela.

42 Du com an earm wuduwe, and

wearp twegen feordlingas.

43 Da clypode he his leorning-cnihtas,
and saede him, S6}>lice ic eow secge, da3t
deos earme wniduwe eallinga maest sealde,
dara de on toU-sceamul sealdon.

44 Ealle sendon of dam de hi gen oh
hcefdon ; s6|)lice deos of hyre yrm})e call
da't heo hgefde sealde, ealle hyre and-
lyfene.

Chap. XIII.

i Da he of dam temple
code, da cwse}> an of his leorning-cnih-
tmn to him, Lareow, loca, hwylce stiinas
her synd, and hw}'lce getimbrunga disscs
temples.

2 Da cwjej) se Hsclcnd, Ne geseo gc
ealle das mycelan getimbrunga] nc bij)
her Isefcd stan ofcr stan, de ne beo
toworpen.

3 Da hi sacton on Oliuctcs diinc ongcJi
dcet tenipcl, syndcrlice bine l\trus, and
Jacobus, and lohannes, and Andreas
aesodon,

4 Scgc us, hwainnc das jiing gcwurdon,
and hwylc tacen bi|>, daMine callc das
|)ing onginna}) bcon ge-endod.

5 Da ongan se Hielcnd him andswar-
igondc to cwedan, Warniaj), da^t cow
nan man ne beswice ;

6 S6)>lice manega cuma}) on minum
naman, and cweda)>, Ic com Crist ; and
beswicaj) manega.

7 And donne gc gchyra|) gcfeohtu and

gcfcohta hlisan, ne ondrccde ge eow
hit gcbyraj) da?t hit gebelimpe, ac donne
gyt nis ende.

;

;
;

;

;

XII. 39-XIIL 7.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

239

39 And sitte in synagogis in tbe firste
cliaires, and the firste sitting places in
soperis

40 The whiche deuouren the housis of

widewis, vndir colour of long preier
thei taken leno^er dom.

a5eins

sittinge

41 And Jhesus

the
treserle, biheld hou the cumpany of
peple caste money in to the tresorie ;
and manye riche castiden many thingis.
42 Sothli whanne o pore widowe hadde
comen, sche sente tweye mynutis, that
is, a ferthing.

43 And his discipHs clepid to gidere,
he seith to hem, Treuly I seie to 50U,
for this pore widowe sente more than
alle, that sente in to the tresorie.

44 Sothli alle sente of that thing that
was plenteuous to hem ; but this of hir
myseste sente alle thingis that she hadde,
al hir lyflode.

39 And the chefe seates in the sina-
in the vppermost

sit

goges, and to
roumes att feastes

40 And devoure widowes houses, and

vnder a colour praye longe prayers
these shall have greater damnacion.

41 And Jesus sat over agaynst the
treasury, and behelde howe the people
putt money into the
treasury ; and
many that were ryche cast in moch.

42 And there cam a certayne povre
widowe, and she threwe in two mytes,
whiche make a farthynge.
43 And he called vnto hym his dis-
ciples, and sayd vnto them, Verely I
saye vnto you, that thys pover widowe
hath cast moare in then all they which
have caste into the treasury.

44 For they all putt in off their super-
fluite ; but she off her poverte cast in
all that she had, even all her livynge.

Chap. XIII. i And whanne he wente
out of the temple, oon of his disciples
seith to him, Maistir, bihold, what maner
stoones, and what manere bildingis.

Chap. XIII.

i And as he went out
of the temple, won of his disciples sayd
vnto hym, Master, se, what stones, and
what bildynges are here.

2 And he arisweringe seith to him,
Seeste thou alle thes greete bildingis ?
ther schal not be left a stoon vpon a
stoon, the which schal not be distroyed.

3 And whanne he sat in the mount of
Olyuete a3cns the temple, thei axiden
hym by hem silue, Petre, and James,
and John, and Andrew,

4 Seie thou to vs, whanne thes thingis
schulen be maad, and what tokene,
whanne alle thes thingis schulen bigynne
for to be endid.

5 And Jhesus answcringe bigan for to
Boic to hem, Se ^e, that no man disceyuc
50U

6 For many schulen come in my name,
Beiynge, For I am ; and thei schulen
disceyuc manye.

;^

7 Sotlili wliaiinc 3c schulen hecre batcls

and oj»yniouns of batcils, drcde 3c not
forsothc it bihoucth these thingis for to
be don, but not 3it anon the end.

2 And Jesus answered and sayde vnto
hym, Seist thou these greate byldynges*?
there shall not be leefte one stone apon
a nother, that shall not be throwen
doune.

3 And as he sate on mounte Olivete
temple, Peter, and
over
James, and Jhon, and Andrew, axed
hym secretly,

ayenst

the

4 Tell vs, when these thinges shalbe,
and what is the signe, when all these
thinges shalbe fulfilled.

5 And Jesus answered them and began
to saye. Take hede, lest eny man deceavo
you;

6 For many shall come in my name,
sayinge, I am Christ ; and sliall deceavo
many.
7 When ye kIwiII licarc off waiTO and
tydinges off warre, be ye not troubled ;
for tlicy mustc nedes be, butt the eude
is nott yett.

240

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

;

8 S6})lice jjcod arist fi^dn J'code, and
rice ongen rTce, and Ijooj) cor)>aii styr-
uiiga geond stowa aud hunger ; ctis^yud

9 Warnia}) eow sylfe, hi syllaj? eow on
ge|)ealite, and s\vinga)> on gcsaninuiiL,aim ;
and ge standa}) beforan deninni and
cyningura for minum naman, him on
gewitnesse.

10 And on ealle jjeoda serest gebyra}>

beon tta't godspel gebodod.

11 And clonne hi syllende cow la-daj),
ne fore-snieage ge hwivt ge specon, ac
spccaj) diet eow on dajre tide geseald
ne synd ge na spccendc, ac so
h\\> ;
Hiilga Gast.

12 S6))lice se brodor done brodor to
dca[)e sy\\>, and se faider his sunu, and
da beam arisa}) jigen hyra magas, and
mid dea|)e hi gewaecca)).

13 Aud ge beoj) calhim on hatunge for
s6|)lice se bi[) hal, se

minum naman ;
de od ende })urh-wuna}>.

14 Donne ge geseo^ dajre toworpen-

nysse asceonuuge,

standan dar heo

ne sccal ; donne ongyte se de raet
flcon donne on muntas, da de synd on
ludoa.

15 And se de is ofer |)ecene, ne stige
lie on his liiis, no he in ne ga, dait he
aht on his liiise nimo ;

16

wastya seina.

he ongcau diet he his reaf uime.

16 And se de \)\\> on a^ccrc, ne cyrre

17 A|)|)iin wai |\'iini

qi)niliartoin, yah

17 Wji connendum on dam dagum.

ihuklyaiKleiin in yainaiiu dagain.

iS A|>|mn ]>i(lyai|',
Jilaiilis izwar \viiitrau.

ci

iii wair|nu sa

18 r>idda)>, da^t dis on wintra ne ge-

wcorde.

19 "VVairj)aiul auk jnii dacfos yainai ai^lo
swalt'ika, swe ni was swaloika fram
aiiastodciiiai s^askaftais, JH)ci ga^skop Guj>,
uud hita, yah iii wairj)i]).

19 S6|)lice on dam dagimi beoj> swylce
godrefedncssa, swylce ne gewurdon of
frym}»e da.'re gesceafte, de God gcsccop,
od nil, ne na ne geweordej).

1

4
5
6
7

XIII. 8-19.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE. 1526.

241

8 For folk schal rise vpon folk, and
rewme vpon rewme, and erthe mouyng
schal be by places and hungur ; bigyn-
nyngis of sorwis these thingis.

9 Sothli se 56 50U silf, for thei schulen
take 50U in counceils, and ^e schulen
be beten in synagogis j and ^e schulen
stonde bifore kyngis and domesmen for
me, in to witnessing to hem.

10 And in to alle folkis it bihoueth

first the gospel for to be prechid.

1

And whanne thei schulen lede 50U
bitrayinge, nyle 5e thenke what 5e schulen
speke, but speke 5e that thing that schal
be 3ouen to 30U in that our ; sothli 5e
ben not spekinge, but the Hooly Gost.

12 Forsothe a brother schal bitraye,
the brother in to deeth, and the fadir
the sone, and sones schulen ryse to gidre
a3ens fadris and modris, and ponysche
hem by deeth.

13 And 36 schulen be in hate to alle
men for my name ; but he that schal
susteyne in to the ende, this schal be saf.
14 Forsothe whanne 3e schulen se the

abhomynacioun of discomfort,

stondinge wher it
owith not ; vndirstonde he that redith ;
thanne thei that be in Judee, flee in
to hillis.

15 And he that is aboue the roof, come
he not doun in to the hous, ncithir cntre
he, that he take ony thing of his hows ;

16 And he tliat schal be in the feeld,
tumc not a3en byhynde for to take his
cloth.

17 Sothli wo to licm tliat ben with

chikle, and norischingc in tho daycs.

18 Thcrforc preic 30, that thei \)cn not

8 For there shall nacion aryse agaynste
nacion, and realme agaynste realme, and
there shalbe erthquakes in all quarters
and famysshment and troubles ;
these
are the begynnynge off sorowes.

9 Butt take ye hede to youre selves,
for they shall brynge you vppe to the
counsels, and into the synagogges, and
ye shalbe beeten ; and ye shalbe brought
before rulers and kynges for my sake,
for a testimoniall vnto them.

10 And the gospell muste fyrste be

publysshed amonge all nacions.

11 Butt when they leade you and
presentt you, take noo thought afore
honde what ye shall saye, nether yma-
gion, butt whatsoever is geven you att
the same tyme, that speake ; for it shall
nott be ye that shall speake, butt the
Holy Goost.

12 Ye and the brother shall delyvre
the brother to deeth, and the father the
Sonne, and the chyldren shall ryse a-
gaynste their fathers and mothers, and
shall putt them to deeth.

13 And ye shalbe hated off all men for
my names sake ; butt whosoever shall
endure vnto the ende, shalbe safe.

1

Moreover when ye se the abominable
desolacion, where off is spoken by Daniel
prophete, stonde were itt ought
the
let hym that redeth it vnder-
nott ;
stonde itt ; then let them which be in
lewry, fle to the mountaynes.

1

1

And let hym that is on the housse
toppe, nott descende doune into the
housse, nether entre there in, to fetche
eny thynge oute off his housse ;

And lett hym thatt is in the felde,
not tourne backe agayne vnto tho
thynges which he leefte bchynde hym,
for to take his cloothcs with hym.

1

Butt woo is then to them that are
with chylde, and to them that geve
souckc in thoose daycs.

18 But prayc, that yourc flyght be not

don in wyiitir.

in the wynter.

19 Forsoth the ilke 'daycH of tribulu-
cioun schulen be suche, whichc mancrc
wereii not fro the bygyimyiigc of crea-
ture, the which God made, til now,
neither sclmlcn be.

19 For there shalbe in those daycs
Huclie tribulacion, as was not from tlie
bcgyfinyngc off creatures, which God
created, vnto this tyme, nether shalbe.

;

1

242

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

20 Yah ni Frauya gamiiur^itlecli jans

J)auli ^^anesi

clagaiis, ui
akei in |>ize gawalidane jiauzei gawalida,
gamaurgida ]>aus dagans.

aiiiliuu leike

20 And gif Drihten djis dagas no ge-
scyrte, nan fiscsc ne wurdc hal ; ac for
dam gecorenum de he geceas, he ge-
scyrte da dagas.

21 Yah ]jan yabai whas izwis qi})ai,
Sai ! her Christus, aij)))au sai ! yainar,
ni gahiubyaij).

22 Uute urreisaud

galiui^Mchristyus
yah galiugapraufcteis, yah giband taik-
nins yah faiiratanya, du afairzyan, yabai
mahteig siyai, yah, |)ans gawalidans.

2

And gif eow hwylc seg]?, WitodHce!
dser he is, ne

her is Crist, witodhee !
gelyfe ge.

22 SojjHce lease Cristas and lease wit-
egan arisa)', and wyrca}) fore-beacnu, to
beswicanne, eac, gif hit beon mieg, da
gecorenan.

23 1]) yus saiwhi}> ;

sai ! fauragataih

23 Warnia}) eow ; ml !

ealle |)ing de

'izwis allata.

ic eow fore-Sivde.

24 Akei in yainans dagans, afar \>o
aglon yaina, sauil riqizeijj, yah mena ni
gibij^ liuhaj? scin,

24 Ac on dam dagimi, refter daere
geswencednysse, by|? sunne aj'Costrod,
and se mona his beorhtnesse ne sylj),

25 Yah stairnons

wair|)and
driusandeins, yah mahteis J)OS in himin-
am, gawagyanda.

hirainis

26 Yah jjau gasaiwhand sunu mans
in milhmam, mi]? mahtai

qiniandan
nianagai yah wulj'au.

27 Yah })an iusandei}) aggiluns seinans,
yah galisi})
seinans
af fidwor windam, fram andyam airj'os
und andi hiniinis.

gawalidans

|)ans

28 A|j|>an af sraakkabagma ganiniij) ]>o

pan |)is

gayukon.
))la(ius
wair|)i|>, yah u«keinand hiubos, kuunnj)
|>atei newha ist asans.

yujjun asts

29 Swah yali yus, jian gasaiwliij) j^ata
wairj)an, kunucij) j atci newha siyu]) at. .

25 And heofones steorran beo}) fcal-
lende, and beoj) astyrode, da megenu
de on heofonum synd.

26 Donne gcseo^ hi mannes sunu cum-
endne on genipum, raid mycelum moeg-
ene and wuldre.

27 Donne sent he his englas, and hi
gaderia|) his gecorenan of feower wind-
um, of eorjjam heahnesse od heofones
hcahnesse.

28 Leorniajj an bigspel be dam fic-
Donne his twi bij) nuaru, and
trcowe.
leaf beo[) acennede, ge witon da't sumor
is gehcnde.

29 And wite ge, donne ge das J)ing

geseo|>, diet he is dura gehcnde.

30 S6)dice

ic cow secge, da^t deos
encores ne gewit, ferdam ealle das jnng
geweordon.

31 Heofon and eor|>e gewltaj>, witod-

lice mine word ne gewita|>.

32 1)0 dam divge and dare tide nan
nvan nat, ne englas on heofone, nc man-
nes sunu, biiton fajder ana.

33 Warnia}', and wacia)', and gebiddaj)

eow ; ge nyton, hwivnno seo t d ys.

34 Swa se man de a'l|)eodilice ferdc,
forlet his hiis, and sealde his |>eowum
daMie anwald gehwylces weorces, and
beodc dam dure-wearde, dcet he wacige.

35 Eornostlicc

wacigea|>, ge nyton.

1

XIII. 20-35.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

243

20 And no but the Lord liadde breig-
gid tbo dayes, al fleisch^ hadde not be
saf ; but for tbe chosene whom he chees,
the Lord hath breiggid dayes.'''

2

And thanne if ony man schulde seie
to 50U, Lo ! here is Crist, loo ! there,
beleue ^e not.

22 For fals Cristis and fals prophetis
5yue
schulen
tokenes and grete wondris, to disceyue,
if it may be don, 5he, the chosene.

vp, and

ryse

schulen

20 And excepte that the Lord had
shortened those dayes, no man shulde
be saved ; but for the electes sake which
he hath chosen, he hath shortened thoose
dayes.

21 And then yfF eny man saye vnto
you. Loo ! here is Christ, loo ! he is
there, beleve nott.

22 For falce Christes shall aryse and
falce propetes, and shall shewe myracles
and wonders, to deceave, yf it were pos-
sible, evyn the electe.

23 Therfore se 5e ; loo ! I haue bifore

23 But take ye hede ; beholde ! I have

seid to 50U alle thingis.

shewed you all thinges before.

24 But in tho dayes, aftir that tribula-
cioun, the sunne schal be maad derk,
and the mone schal not 5yue hir schyn-

24 Moreover in thoose dayes, after that
tribulacion, the sunne shall wexe darke,
and the mone shall not geve her light,

'6'
25 And sterris of heuenes schal be fall-
inge doun, and vertues that be in he-
uenes, schulen be mouyd.

26 And thanne thei schulen se mannis
sone comynge in cloudis of heuene, with
greet vertu and glorie.

27 And thanne he schal sende his
aungels, and schal gedre his chosene fro
foure wyndis, fro the loweste thing of
erthe vnto the hi3este thing of heuene.

28 Forsothe of the fyge tree lerne ^e
the parable. Whanne now his braunche
schal be tendre, and leeuys ben sprongen
out, 30 witen for somer is in the nexte.

29 So and whanne 3e schulen se alle
these thingis ben maad, wite 3e, that it
is in the nexte in the doris.

30 Treuly I seye to 30U, for this gene-
racioun schal not passe awey, til ulle
these thingis be don.

31 Heuene and erthe schal passe, for-

Bothe my wordis schulen not passe.

32 Treuly of that day or our no man
woot, nethir aungelis in heuene, nether
the sone, no but the fadir.

33 Se 50, wake 3c, and preic 30 ; sothli

50 witen not, whanne tyme is.

34 For as a man the which gon fer in
pilgrimage, Icfte his hous, and 3af to his
•eruauutis power of euery work, and
comaundide to the porter, that he schulde
wake.

35 Therfore wake 30, forsothe 30 witen

25 And the starres off heven shall fall,
and the powers which are in heven,
shall move.

26 And then shall they se the sonne of
man commynge in the cloudes, with
greate power and glory.

27 And then shall he sende his angels,
and shall gaddre to gedder his electe
from the fouare wyndes, and from the
one ende off the worlde to the other.

28 Learne a similitude of the fygge
When his braunches are yett
tree.
tender, and hath brought forthe leves,
ye knowe that somnier ys neare.

29 So in lyke maner when ye se these
thinges come to passe, vnderstond, that
it ys nye even att the dores.

30 Verely I saye vnto you, that thys
generacion shall nott passe, tyll all these
thynges be done.

31 Heven and erth shall passe, butt

my wordes shall nott passe.

32 Butt of the daye and the houre
knoweth no man, no nott the angels
which are in heven, nether the sonne
hym silfe, save the father only.

33 Take hede, watche, and praye ; for

ye knowe nott, when the tyme ys.

34 As a man which ys gone in to a
straunge countrey, and hath lefte hys
houHse, and gevcn auctorite to hys scr-
vauntes un<l to every man hys worke,
and commaunded the j)orter to watche.
35 Watche therfore, for ye knowe not,

R2

244

GOTHIC, 360.

. tcins |)is balsanis war}) 1

.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

hwrenne da^s buses hiaford cym)i, de
on cefen, de on midre nihte, de on han-
crede, de on mergen ;

36 Dc-Lts he cow slapende gemete,

donnc he fserinira cymj\

37 S6))licc diet ic eow secge, eallum
ic hit secge, Waciajj.

Chap. XIV. "^i S6))Hce da aefter twam
And da
dagum waeron eastron
sohton da heah-sacerdas and da bocer-
as, Im hi hine mid facne namon, and
ofslogon.

2 Da cwjcdon hi, Na?s na on freols-
dsegc, de-hts dses folces gehlyd wcurde.

3 And da se Hselend woes on Bcthama,
on Simones hiise anes hreoflan, and dar
soet, dd com an wif, and lia'fde byre
sealf-box deorwyrj^es nardcs ; and to-
his heafod
brocenum sealf-boxe, ofer
ag6t.

4 Sume hit unweordlicc forbreron, and
bctwux him sylfum cwacdon, Foiliwi
wa3S disse sealfe forspillednes gcworden 1

5 ISfalit wcsi auk |)ata Lalsan fraLufryan
'in mana,f,nzo |)au ))riyahuiKla skattc, yah
Yah aiidstaurraidcdun
iriban unlcdaim.

5 Deos scalf milite boon gescaUl to
|)rim bund penegum, and bcon |)earfuni
geseahl. And yrsodon agen hi.

I'O- ..

..

6 i|) icsus qa|), Lcti]) |io ; dmvhc izai
iisl)riiiti|) "? j)annu goj) waiirstw waiirhta
bi mis.

7 Slntcino ank |)an3 unlcdans liabai'j)
\\\\c\\\ inagu}) mi
m'\\>
waila taiiyan; ij) mik ni siiitcino habai}>.

i/Nvis,

yali

j^an

8 patci habaida so gatawida ; faursnau

salboii mcin Icik du usfilha.

9 Amen qil)a

izwis,

j'iswharuh

jici

mcryada so ai\vap:.[?clyo and alia manas-
e\>, yah jnitei gatawida so, rodyada du
gamundai izos.

6 Da cwne)j

se Hsehmd, Lceta|>

h\ ;
hwi synd ge byre gramel god wcorc
heo on me worhte.

7

S6|dice symble ge babbaj) |>carfan
mid eow, and donne ge wylhi|>, ge mag-
on him tcala don ; me ge symble nab-
ba)>.

8 Deos scaUlc daet heo ha^fdc ; heo
com to smyrianne minne lichaman on
byrgone.

'9 S6|>bcc ic eow secge, swa hwar swa
dis godspell gebodod bi|) on eallum
middan-earde. l)i|> gebodod, da^t heo dis
on his gemyudc dyde.

10 Yah iudas Iskanotcis, ains |>izo
twalibo, '^alaij) du l>aim gudyam, ci ga-
lewidcdi lua im.

TO Da ludas Scarioth, da^t is wider-
saoa, an of dam twelfum, ferde to dam
heah-saccrdum, dxt he hine behvwde.

;

;

XIII.36.-Xiy.10.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

245

not, wlianne
lious
Cometh, in the euenticle^ or in the myd-
ny^t, or kockis erowynge, or morwynge

of tlie

the

lord

^6 Lestwhanne he schal come sudenly,

he fynde 30U slepinge.

37 Forsothe that that I seie to 50U. I

seie to alle, Wake 5e.

when the master of the housse wyll come,
whether att even, or at niydnyght, whe-
ther att the cocke erowynge, or in the
daunynge

36 Lestyff he come sodenly, he shulde

fynde you slepynge.
37 And that I saye vnto you, I saye

vnto all men, Watche.

Chap. XIV. i Forsothe pask and the
feeste of therf looues''" was aftir the
And the hi^este prestis
secunde day.
and scribis sou3ten, hou thei schulden
holde him with gile, and sle.

2 Sothli thei seiden, Not in the feeste
day, lest perauenture noyse were maad
in the peple.

3 And whanne he was at Betanye, in
the hous of Symount leprous, and restid,
a womman comynge, hauynge a box of
precious oynement spikanard ; and the
box brokun, helde out on his heed.

4 Forsoth ther weren summe beringe
vn worthily * with ynne hem silf, and
seyinge, Wherto is this loss of oynement
maad 1

5 For this oynement my3te haue be
sold more than for thre hundrid pens,
and be 3ouun to pore men. And thei
groyneden in to hir.

6 Sothli Jhesus seide, SufTre hir ; what
be 30 heuy to hir 1 she hath wrou3t good
work in mc.

7 For euer more 30 schulen haue pore
men with 30U, and whanne 30 schulen
wolle, 3e mown do wel to hem ; forsoth
je schulen not euermore haue me.

8 She dide that that she haddc ; schc
bifore cam for to anoyntc my l)ody into
buriyngc.

9 Treuli I seie to 30U, where euerc this
gospel Hchul be prcchid in al the world,
and tliat this womrnnn hath done, schal
be told in to mynde of hir,

10 And Judas Scarioth, oon of the
twcluc, wentc to the lii3C8tc prestis, that
he sclmldc bitray liim to hem.

Chap. XIV.

i After two dayes fol-
owed ester and the dayes of swete breed.
And the hye prestes and scrybes sought
meaues, howe they myght take hym by
crafte, and putt hym to deeth.

2 Butt they sayde, Nott on the feaste
daye, leest eny busynes aryse amonge
the people.

3 When he was in Bethania, in the
housse off Simon the leper, even as he
sate att meate, there cam a woman, with
an alablaster boxe of oyntment called
narde that was pure and costly ; and
she brake the boxe, and powred it on
his heed.

4 There were some that disdayned in
them selves, and sayde, What neded this
waste of oyntment ?

5 For it myght have bene soolde for
more then two houndred pens, and bene
geven vnto the povre. And they grudged
agaynste her.

6 And Jesus sayd, Lett her be in reest j
why gi'cve ye her % she hath done a
goode worke on me.

7 Ye and ye shall have povre with you
all wayes, and when soever ye will, yc
maye do them goode ; butt me ye shal
not have al wayes.

8 She hath done that she coulde ; she
cam a fore honde to anoynt my boddy
to his buryingc wanle.

9 Vercly I saye vnto you, wheresoever
thys gosjtcll slialbc preached thorow out
the whole worlde, thys also that she
hath done, shal be rehearsed in remcm
brauncc of her.

10 And Judas Iscarioth, won off the
twelve, went awnyc vnto the hye prestes,
to botrayc him vnto thcin.

6
2

24r>

GOTHIC, 360.

II T|j CIS galmusyandans Aii?inoJe(liin,
yah tjahaihaitun ininia faihu <(iljan. Yah
sokidu whaiwa gatilaba ina galewidedi.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
II Da hi fiis gchyrdon hi falinodon,
and bcheton him feoh to syllanne. And
he smeade hu he hiue digellice scalde.

[St. Mark

1

Yah jjamma fruniistin da^R azwine,
J)an paska salidedun, qe})im du imma ]>&{
sipoiiyos is, AVhar wileis ci galeijaiidans,
inanwyaima, ci niatyais paska 1

13 Yah insandida twans siponye seiii-
aize, qaj)uh du i'ln, Gaggats in \>o baurg,
yah gamoteij? igqis manna kas watins
bairands ; gaggats afar jjamma.

14 Yah j)adei inngalei|)ai, qi|)aits j)am-
ma heiwafrauyin, patei laisareis qi|>i}?,
Whar sind salijjwos,
|)arei paska mi]>
siponyam meinaim matyau 1

15 Yah sa izwis taikneij) kclikn mikil-
ata gastrawi]^ manwyata, yah yainar
manwyaij) unsis.

1

Yah usiddycdun j^ai sipon

.

.

.

12 And dam forman da'ge azimorum,
da hi eastron offrodon, his leorning-
cnihtas him ssedon, Hwydcr wylt dii
d:et we faron, and gegearwian de, daet
dii eastron ete 1

13 Dii sende he twegcn of his Icorning-
Ga}) on da
cnilitmn, and su?de liim,
ceastre, and inc agen-yrnj) sum man
l)erende sume
folgiaj)
liim.

wieter-flaxan ;

14 And swa hwyder swa he in-gse}i,
secga}) does buses hhlforde, U're blreow
segj), Hwar is mln gyst-hiis and m:n
gereord, hwar ete ic eastron mid min-
um leorning-cnihtum ?

15 And he inc

geswutela)) mycelc

hcallc gedoefte, and gcgearwia)? us dara.

16 Da ferdon his IcorninG^-cnihtas, and
comon on da censtre, and filndon hit
eall swa he ssede ; and gegearwodon da
eastron.

17 So|>lice da jefen com, him twclfum

mid him

18 Sittendum, and etcndum, saede se
Hselcnd, S6j>lice ic cow secge, diet cower
an de mid me yt, gesylj) me.

19 Da ongunnon hi beon drcorige, and
bctwux him cwedan, Cwyst dii com ic
hit?

20 Dji sfrdc he liim, A'n of cow twclf-
um me sylji, se de his hand on discc
mid me dypj'.

21 And witodlice manncs sunn gjcj^,
swa be him awritcn is ; wii dam men,
)mrh done de mannes sunu geseald bi}>.
Betcre him wsere, daet se man acenned
mere. *

22 Ilim da etendum, afeng se Hjclcnd
brjcc, and
hlilf, and hine
scalde him, and dus cw«]>, Nimajj ; dis
ys min lichama.

blctsicnde

23 And onfcng calice, and Gode jmncas
dydc and sealde him, and ealle him of
driincon.

24 Da ssede he him, Dis ys min blod

6
8
2
1

2

XIV. T 1-24.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

1

The whiche heerynge ioyeclen, and
bihi3ten hem to 5yue him money. And
he sou3te how he schulde bitraye him
couenably.

1

And the firste day of therue loues,
whenne pask was offrid, disciph's seyn
to him, Whidir wolt thou we go, and
make redy to thee, that thou ete pask ]

13 And he sendith tweyne of his dis-
ciplis, and seith to hem, Go ^e in to the
citee, and a man beringe a galoun of
watir schal renne to 30U j"*" suwe 3e
him.

14 And whidir euere he schal entre,
seye ^e to the lord of the hous. For the
maister seith, Wher is my fulfilling,^
where I schal ete pask with my dis-
ci pi is 1

15 And he schal shewe to 30U a greet
souping place strewid, and there make
56 redy to vs.

1

And his disciplis wenten forth, and
camen in to the citee, and founde as he
hadde seid to hem ; and thei maden
redy pask.

17

Sothli euen maad, he cam with

twelue.

1

And hem sittinge at the mete, and
etinge, Jhesus seith, Treuli I seie to 30U,
for oon of 30U that etith with me, schal
bitraye me.

19 And thei bigunnen for to be sori,
and to seie, ech by hyra silf, Whether I ?

20 The which seith to hem, Oon of
twelue that puttith yn the bond with
me iu the plater.

2 1 And sothli mannis sone goth, as it
is writun of him ; forsoth wo to that
man, bi whom mannis sone schal be bi-
It were good to him, if that
trayd.
ilke man hadde not be Ijorun.

22 And hem etinge, Jhesus took bred,
and blessingc brak, and 3af to hem, and
seith. Take 3c ; this is my body.

23 And the cuppe takun, he doynge
gracis 3af to hem, and allc ilrunkun
therof.

24 And he seith to hem, This is my

TYNDALE, 1526.

247
11 When they herde that they were
gladde, and promised that they wolde
geve hym money.
And he sought
howe he myght convenyently betraye
hym.

1

And the fyrst daye of swete breed,
when they offered the pascal lambe, his
disciples sayd vnto hym, Where wylt
thou that we goo, and prepare, that thou
mayste eate the ester lambe ?

13 And he sent fourth two of his dis-
ciples, and sayde vnto them, Goo ye into
the cite, and there shall a man mete
you beringe a pitcher of water ; folowe
hym.

14 And whidthersoever he goeth in,
saye ye to the good man off the housse,
The master axeth. Where is the geest
chambre, where I shall eate the ester
lambe with my disciples ?

15 And he wyll shewe you a greate
parlour paved and prepared, there make
reddy for vs.

16 And his disciples went forth, and
cam in to the cite, and founde as he had
sayd vnto themj and made reddy the
ester lambe.

17 And att even, he cam with the

twelve.

T 8 And as they sate att borde, and ate,
Jesus sayde, Verly I saye vnto you, that
won off you shall betraye me, which
eateth with me.

19 And they began to morne, and to
saye to hym, won by won, Ys it I ? and
another sayde, Ys it I ?

20 He answered and sayd vnto them.
It is won of the .xij. and the same
depeth with me in the platter.

21 The Sonne of man gocth, as it is
written of hym ; but woo be to that
man, by whome the sonne of man is
Goodc were hitt for hym, if
betrayed.
that man had never bene borne.

22 And as tiiey ate, Jesus toko breede,
gave thankcs, brake it and gave it to
them, and sayd, Take, eate ; thys ys my
body.

23 And he

copjjc, gave
thankcs and gave it to them, and they
dronke all ofi' it.

tokc

the

24 And he sayde vnto them, Thys ya

248

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Makk

daTC niwan cydnesse, daet bi)> for mau-
egum agoten.

25 Sojjlice ic cow secge, dset ic hconon-
for|) nc drince of dyses win-geartles
cynnc, od done da^g domic ic bine
niwne drince on Codes rice.

26 And gecwedenum lofe, hi ferdon on

Ele-bergcna munt.

27 Da c\ysc]> se Ha?lend, Ealle ge bcojj
ge-untreowsode on disse nihte ; fordani
de liit a writ en is, Ic slea da^ne byrdc,
and beo}) da seep toditcfede.

28 Ac a^fter dam de ic arise, ic cume

bef5ran cow on Calileam.

29 Da ssede Pctrus him, Dcah do

ealle swicion, ne swicige ic de na.

30 Da cwajj) se Hselend, S6j)lice ic de
secge, daet du on disse nihte ser baua
tuwa erawe, jjriwa wid-sajcst miu.

31 And he da;s de mare spra?c, And
deah me gcbyrige mid de to swcltanne,
ne aitsace ic din. And swa hi cwicdon
ealle.

32 Da comon lii to ainim tune, dops
nama wncs Cczcmani. And he cw.TJ) to
his leoriiing-cnihtum, Sittaj) her, od diet
ic me gebidde.

33 And he nam da mid him rctrum
and lacobum and lohaiinem, da ongan
be forhtian, and sargian.

34 And Scede him, Unrot is mlii sawl

od dea|) ; gebida}) her, and waciaj>.

35 Da he lyt-lnvon forj>-st6p, he a-
strchtc bine ofer da eor|^an, and he banl,
git liit beon mihtc, diet he on dicre tide
fnim him gewite.

36 And da cw\t|) he, Abba, dat is,
Fiinlcr, on lire gepeode, ealle I'ing de
synd mihtiglicc, afyr dysne calic fram
me ; ac ml diet ic wylle, ac da?t dii.

37 Da com he, and fiinde hi slicpcndc.
And ewa^j) to Petre, Simon, sliopst dii ?
ne mihtcst dii ane tide wacian 1

38 "\Vacia|>, and gebidda)>, da?t gc on
costnunge ne gfin ; witodlice se gast is
geiU'u, ac dajt Htcsc is untrum.

1

;

;

XIV. 25-38.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

blood of the newe testament, the which
schal be shedd out for manye.

25 Treuly I seie to 50U, for now I schal
not drynke of this fruit of vyne, til in
to that daye whanne I schal drynke it
newe in the rewme of God.

26 And the ympne^ seid, thei wenten

out in to the hil of Olyues.

27 And Jhesus seith to hem, Alie ^e
schulen be sclaundrid in me in this ni3t
for it is writun, I schal smyte the schep-
herde, and the scheep of the floe schulen
be disparplid.

28 But aftir that I schal ryse a5en, I

schal go bifore 50U in to Galilee.

29 Forsoth Petre seith to him, And if

alle schulen be sclaundrid, but not I.

30 And Jhesus seith to him, Treuly I
seie to thee, for thou to day bifore the
cok in this ny^t twyes 5yue vois, thries
thou ert to denye me.

3

And he spak more, And if it bihoue
me to dye to gidere with thee, I schal
Sothli and lyk manere
not denye thee.
alle seiden.

32 And thei camen in to a place, to
whom the name Gethsamany. And he
seith to his disciplis, Sitte ^e here, the
while I preie.

33 And he takith Petre and James
and John ^vith him, and bigan for to
drede, and to hcuye.
34 And he seith to hem, My soule is
sorvvful til to the deeth ; susteyne 3e^
here, and preie ^e with me.

35 And whanne he hadde gon forth a
lite], he felde down on the crthe, and
preiede, that, if it my3te be, the our
Bchulde passe fro him.

36 And he scide, Fadir, alle thingis
ben possilile to thee, tumc fro me this
cuppc ; but not that I wolc, but that
that thou.

37 And lie cam, and fond liom slcp-
yngc. And he Hcith to Petre, Syniount,
my^tist thou not wake
elcpist thou 1
with me oon our ^

38 Wake 3c, and preie 3c, that 3c cntrc
forHothc the

not in to temptacioun ;
•pirit is rcdy, but the Heisch syk.

TYNDALE, 1526.

249
my blonde of the newe testament, which
shalbe sheed for many.

that daye that I

25 Verely I saye vnto you, I wyll
drynke no moore off this frute off the
vyne, vntyll
shall
drynke it newe in the kyngdom of God.
26 And when they had sayd grace,
they went out in to the mount Olivete.
27 And Jesus sayde vnto them, All ye

shalbe hurtt thorowe me thys nyght
for it is written, I wyll smyte the shep-
heerd, and the sheepe shalbe scattered.

28 Butt after that I am rysen agayne,

I wyll goo into Galile before you.

29 Peter sayde vnto hym, And though
all men shulde be hurte, yett wolde
nott I.

30 And Jesus sayd vnto hym, Verely
I saye vnto the, thys daye even in this
nyght before the cocke crowe twyse,
thou shallt deney me thryse.

31 And he spake boldlyer, No, if I
shulde dey- with the, I woll not deny
the. Lyke wyse also sayd they all.

32 And they cam in to a place, named
Gethsemani. And he sayde to his dis-
ciples, Sitt ye here, whyll I goo aparte
and praye.
33 And he toke with hym Peter James
and Jhon, and he began to waxe abassh-
ede, and to be in an agony.
34 And sayde vnto them, My soule is
very hevy even vnto the deeth ; tary
here, and watche.

35 And he went forth a lytle, and fell
dounne on the grounde, and prayede,
that, yf it were possible, the houre myght
passe from hym.

36 And he sayde, Abba Father, all
thingcs are possible vnto the, take awayc
this cuppc from nie ; ncvcrthelesse nott
that I wyll, butt that thovve wilt be
done.

37 And he cam, and foundc them sh^p-
ingc. And sayd to J'ctcr, Simon, slepcst
thou 1 coudest not thou watclic with me
one houre 1

3H Watche yc, and ]>rayo, least ye cntro
into t(!ni|itaciou ; the sprctc is rcdy, but
the flcssh is wcckc.

2:50

GOTHIC, 360.

41

.

.

.

sai ! galewyada sunus mans 'in

handuns frawaurhtaize.

;

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. ^Fark

39 And eft he gebted da ylcan spra?ce.

40 And da he hine eft agen-bewende,
he funde hi slsepende ; hyra cagan wscr-
on gehefegode. And hi nyston, liwiet
hi him andswaredon.

41 Da com he |>riddan side, and spcdc
him, Slajtaj? nu, and restaf) ; genoh hit
is manncs
ys.
sunu geseald on synfuh-a handa.

Tima ys cumen ; mi !

42 Urreisi}), gaggam; sai! sa lewyands

mik atnewhida.

43 Yah, sunsaiw nauhjjaniih at I'mnia
rodyandin, qam ludas, sums |)ize twalibe,
yah mi]) imma managei mi}? hairum yah
triwam, fram })aim aulmmistam gud-
yam, yah bokaryam, yah sinistam.

44 Atuh jjan gaf sa le>vyands im
bandwon, qi|)ands, pammei kukyau, sa
1st j greipi)) j)ana, yah tiuhij) arniba.

45 Yah qimands, sunsaiw atgaggands
du imma, qaj), Rabbei, rabbei ; yah
kukida imma.

42 A'risa)), uton gan ; mi! is gehende

se de me syl[).

43 Him da da gyt sprecendum, com
ludas Scarioth, dait ys widersaca, an of
dam twelfum, and mid him myccl mcn-
egeo mid swurdum and mid salihini,
fram heah-sacerdum, bocerum, and eald-
rum.

44 S6])lice his Isewa him tacen scakle,
and dus cwsejj, Swa hwylcne swa ic
cysse, he hit ys ; nimaj>, and lsedaj> hine
WEerh'ce.
45 And sona swa he com, he ge-
nealsehte him to, and cwa?ji, Liircow
and cyste hine.

46 t\) eis uslagidedun handuns ana ina,

yah undgripun ina.

47 i|> ains sums )>ize atstandandane
imma, uslukands hairu, sloh skalk aubu-
rn istins gudyins, yah afsloh imma auso
j)ata tailiswo.

48 Yah andhafyands Icsus qa]) du im,
8we du waidcdyin urniiinu}) mi^ hairum
yah triwam, greipan mik ]

49 Daga wliammcli was at izwis, in alh
gripuj) mik ; ak ci

yali

hiisyaiids,
usruiiuodcdeina bokos.

ni

.r;o Yah aflctandans

ina,

ga|>huilum

allai.

46 And hi hyra handa on hine wurpon,

and namon hine.
47 S6j)licc an of dam de dar embe
liton stodon, his swurde abranl, and
sloh da^s sacerdes })eow, and his eare
of-acearf.

48 Da cwffij)

se Hselend him and-
swariendc, Swa swa to anum sccaj'an
ge ferdon mid swurdum and treowum,
me gefon 1

49 Donne ic dtegliwamlicc mid eow
wa?s, on temple laercnde, and gc mc ne
niimon ; ac dset da gcwritu syn gcfyl-
lede.

50 Da forlcton

liis
callo hyne, and flug(ui.

leorning-cnihtas

51 Yah ains sums yiiggalau|>s laistida
afar imma, ])iwaibi|i9 leina ana nacjad-
ana ; yah gripun is j)ai yuggaUiudeis.

51 Sum iunglinghim fyligde, mid anre
scytan bewaefcd nacod ; and hi namon
hine.

52 Tf|i IS bilci|mnd8 jmmma Icina, naqa])3

ga|iUuih faura ini.

53 Yah gatauhun Kcsu du auhumistin
mij) imma,

Yali garunnun

gudyin.

52 Da aworpcnrc dsere scytan, nacod

he him fram Heah.
53 And hi laeddon dapne Hselcnd to
dam hcah-sacerde. And comon ealle

XIV. 39-53.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
39 And eftsoone he goynge preiede,
the same word seyinge.

40 And he turnyd a3en eftsoone, fond
sothli her y^en were
And thei knewen not, what

hem slepinge ;
greuyd.
thei schulden answere to him.

41 And he cam the thridde tyme, and
seith to hem, Slepe ^e nowe, and reste
50 ; sothli it sufl&cith. The our cometh ;
loo ! mannis sone schal be bitrayed in
to hondis of synful men.

TYNDALE, 1526.

251

39 And agayne he went awaye and

prayde, and spake the same wordes.

40 And he returned, and founde them
aslepe agayne ; for their eyes were hevy.
Nether coulde they tell, what they
myght answere to hym,
41 And he cam the tlip'de tjone, and
sayd vnto them, Slepe hens forth, and
The
take youre ease ;
houre is come ; behold e ! the sonne of
man shalbe delyvred into the hondes
of synners.

is ynough.

it

42 Ryse 5e, go we ; loo ! he that schal

bj-traye me is ny^.

43 And, ^it him spekinge, Judas Sca-
rioth, oon of the twelue, cam, and with
him moche cumpeny with swerdis and
staues, sent fi^o the hi^este prestis, and
scribis, and fro the eldere men.

42 Ryse vppe, let vs goo ;
that betrayeth me is come nye.

loo ! he

43 And immediatly, whill he yett spake,
cam Judas, won off the twelve, and with
hyme a greate nomber off people with
sweardes and staves, from the hye prestes,
and scribes, and seniours.

44 Forsothe the traitour hadde ^ouun
to hem a tokene, seyinge, Whom euere
I schal kisse, he it is j holde 50 him,
and lede ^e warly."*"

45 And whanne he cam, anon he com-
inge to him, seith, Maistir ; and he
kisside him.

46 And thei layden hondis in to him,

and heelden him.

47 Sothli oon of men stondinge aboute,
ledinge out a swerd, smot the seruaunt
of the hi3este prest, and kitte of to him
an eere.

48 And Jhesus answeringe seith to
hem, As to a thef 30 han gon out with
swerdis and staues, for to take me ]

49 Forsoth day by day I was at 30U,
techinge in the temple, and 3c heelden
not me ; but that the scripturis be ful-

fillid.

44 He that betrayed hym gave them
a generall token, sayinge. Whosoever I
do kisse, he it is ; take hym, and leade
hym fiwaye warely.
45 And as sone as he was come, he
went streight waye to him, and sayd
vnto hym. Master, master ; and kissed
him.

46 And they leyde their hondes on

him, and toke him.
47 Won off them that stode by, drue
out a swearde, and smote a servaunt off
the hye preste, and cutt off hys eare.

48 And Jesus answered and sayd vnto
them, Ye cam out as vnto a thefc with
sweardes and with staves, ffor to take
me 1

49 I was dayly with you in the temple,
teachinge, and ye toke me not ; but
that the scriptures shulde be fulfdled.

50 Thannc him forsakun, alle his dis-

50 And they all forsoke hym, and

ciplis fledden.

51 Sothli sum jong man, clothid with
lynnen cloth on the ]>are, suede him ;
and thei heelden him.

52 And the lynnen cloth forsakun, he

nakid flci3 awcy fro hem.

ranne awaye.

51 And there was a certeyne yongc
man tliatt folowcd hym, cloothcd in
linnen apon tlie bare ; and the yongc
men caught hym.

52 And he Icfte his lyimcn, and flccd

from them nakecd.

53 And thei leddcn.Jhcsu to the hi3C8tc
And all camcn to gidcrc in to
prest.

53 And they leeddc Jesus awaye to tlio
And to hym canio

hyest preste off all.

1

252

GOTHIC, 360.

AXGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

auhiiniistans f^mdyans alhii yah }>ai siuis-
taiis yah bokaryos.

54 Yah Paitrus fairra))ro laistida afar
inima iiiitc qam "in garda })is auhumistins
Yah was sitands nii}> and-
^udyiiis.
bahtain, yah warinyauds sik at liuhada.

sacerdas and boceras and caldras to-
gajdcre.

54 Petrus him fyligde feorran od cla^s
cafcr-tun. And he siut
lieah-sacerdes
mid dam j^enum, and wyrmde hinc a.'t
dam fyre.

55 I})

jjai auhumistans gudyans, yah
alhi so gafaurds, sokideduu ana lesu
\veit\vodi[)a, du afdaujjyan iiia
; yah ui
bigetun.

56 Managai auk galiiig weitwodidcdun
aua ina, yah samalcikos |)03 weitwodij'os
ni wcsim.

57 Yah sumai usstandandans galiug
weitwodidedun ana ina, qi|)andans,

55 Da heah-sacerdas sohton, and call
tale agen done Hcclend, dat
gejjcaht,
hi hine to dea})e sealdon ; and hi ne
fundon.

56 Manega saedon

lease gecydnysse
agen hine, and da cydnessa nacron
dseslice.

57 Da arisen sume and seedon lease
cydnesse agen hine, and dus cwaedou,

58 patci weis gahausidedum qi|)andau
ina, patei ik gataira alh \>o handuwaurh-
ton, yah bi |>rins dagans anj^ara un-
handuwaurhta gatimrya.

59 Yah ni swa samaleika was weit-

58 So)7es we gehyrdon hine sccgan. T<3
toAvurpe dis hand-worhte tempel, and
aefter ]>r\ni dagum ic oder unhand-worht
getimbrie.
59 And hyra cydnys naes dceslic.

wodiJ>a ize.

60 Yah nsstandands

auhifinista
giidya in midyaim, frah lesu, qi))ands,
Niu andhafyis waiht wha }jai ana |)uk
weitwodyand ?

sa

60 Da aras sum heah-sacerd on hyra
midlene, and fdisode da^ic Ilivleud, Xc
andswarast du nan Jung agen dajt das
de onwurpa}> 1

6

I|> is l^ahaida, yah waiht ni andhof.
Aftra sa auhuniista gudya frah ina, yah
qa)j du ininia, pu is Christus, sa sunus
Jns piujjcigins ?

62 1]) is qa])uh, Ik im ; yah gasai-
tailiswon
wliij)
sitandan niahtais, yah qimandan m{\>
niilhniani liiniiiiis.

Jjana sunu mans

af

63 Jj) sa auhuniista gudya, disskreit-
ands wastyos seinos, qa}>, Wha jjanamais
)iaurl)nni weis woitwodc ?

64 llausidc(UiJ' ])o wayamcrcin is. Wha
ga-

izwis
domidcdun ina skuhui wisan daujau.

paruh cis

)nigkeij) ?

alhii

61 He siiwode, and naht ne
se

and-
hcah-
swarode.
saccrd, Eart dii Crist, da3S gcblotsodan
Godes sunu ?

acsode

hine

Eft

62 Da ssede se Hirlcnd, Ic com ; and
ge gcseo]) mannes sunu on
swydraii
healfe sittan his msegencs, and cumendo
mid hcofoncs genipum.

63 Da cwa»|> se heah-sacerd, his rcaf
sliteude, H>vi gewilnige we gyt cydera 1

64 Ge gehyrdon his bysmer.

Hwivt
}>incj? cow? Da hyrwdon hi ealle hine
and cwtvdon da?t he wsere dea))cs scyl-

65 Yah dugunnun sumai speiwan ana
yali hulyan andwair|)i is, yah
wlit IS,
kaupatyan ina, yah qo}um (hi iinma,
Yah andbahtos gabauryal)a
Praufotci.

k)fa]n slohuii iiia.

66 Yalj wisandin Paitrau in rohsnai
dala})a, yali atiddya aina ))iuyo )>is auhu-
mistins gudyins.

65 And sume agunnon him on spirtan,
ansyne, and mid
and ofer-\\TCon his
fystum hinc bcoton, and him to cwicdon,
A'racd. And da |>cni\s hine mid hantUim
bcoton.

66 And da Pctnis wa^s on cafcr-tune,
da com to him an jnnen dxs hcah-
saccrdcs.

XIV. 54-66.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1K26.

253

0011, the
eldere men.

prestis and .the scribis and

54 Forsoth Petre suede him afer til
with ynne in to the halle of the hi3este
And he sat with the mynystris,
prest.
and warmyde him at the fier.

55 Forsothe the hi5este prestis, and al
the counceil, sou3ten witnessinge a5ens
Jhesu, that thei schulen 5yue him to
deeth ; nether thei founden.

56 Sothli manye seiden fals witness-
inge a^ens him, and the witnessingis
•weren not coueuable.

57 And summe risynge sou5ten fals
witnessing a5ens hym, seyinge,

58 For we han herd him seiynge, I
schal vndo this temple maad with hondis,
and aftir the thridde day I schal bilde
a nother not maad with hondis.

59 And the witnessing of hem was not

all, the hye prestes and the seniours and
the scribes.

54 And Peter folowed a greate way of
even into the pallys of the hye preste.
And he was there and sat with the ser-
vauntes, and warmed hymsilfe att the
fyre.
55 And the hye prestes, and all the
counsell, sought
agaynste
Jesu, to putt hym to deeth ; and they
founde noone.

witnes

for

56 Yett many bare falce witnes a-
gaynste hym, butt their witnes aggreed
not to gedder.
57 And there

aroose certayne and
brought falce witnes againste hym, say-
inge,
58 We herde hym saye, I wyll destroye
this temple made with hondes, and with
in thre dayes I wyll bilde another made
with out hondes.

59 And there witnes aggreed not to

couenable.

gedder.

60 Forsothe the hi^este prest rysinge
vp in to the myddel, axide him, sey-
inge, Answerist thou not ony thing to
tlio thingis that ben put to thee of
these ?

61 Sothli he was stille, and no thing
Eftsoone the hi3est prest
answeride.
axide him, and seide to him, Ert thou
Crist, the sone of blessid God 1

62 Sothli Jhesus seide to him, I am ;
and 36 schulen se mannis sone sittingc
on the ri3t half of the vcrtu of God,
aTid comynge in cloudis of hcuene.

6^ Forsoth the hi3est prest, kittinge
his clothis, seith, What 3it desyren we
witnessis ?
64 3c han hcrdc blasphcmye. What
The whichc alio con-
Bcmeth to 30U'?
denipncdcn him for to be gilty of deeth.

60 And the hyeste preste stode vppe
before them all, and axed Jesus, say-
inge, Answerest thou nothinge, howe is
it that these beare witnes agaynst the 1

61 And he helde his peace, and an-
Agayne the hyeste
swered noothynge.
preste axed hym, and sayde vnto hym,
Arte thou Christ, the sonne off the
Blessed 1

62 And Jesus sayde, I am ; and ye
shall se the sonne off man sitt on the
ryght honde of power, and come in tlic
cloudes off'heven.

6^ Then the hyest preste rent his
cloothcs, and sayd, What nedc we eny
further of witnes ?

64 Ye have horde the blasphemy. What
thinke ye ] And they all gave sentence
that he was worthy of deeth.

65 And summc bigunncn for to bispittc
him, and to hide his y3en, and Kinyt(;
liim witli boftUtis, and seie to liiin, I'ro-
phecic thou. And the mynystris bceten
him with Htroki.s.^

66 And whannc Pctre was in tlio liallc
bynctlien, oon of the hand maydcna of
the hi3cst prest cum.

65 And some began to spit at hym,
and to cover his face, and to ])i't hym
witli tlieir fistoH, and to saye vnto him,
Arcde vnto vs.
scrvauntcs
boflctcd him on tlie face.

And the

66 And I'ctcr was bencetli in the pallys,
and tlicre cam won oil' the wenclies off
the hyest presto.

254

GOTHIC, 360.

67 Yah gasaiwliantlci Paitru warm-
yaiidan sik, insaiwhaiidei clu iinnia qajj,
Yah J)U mi]) lesua |)amma Nazoreiuau
wast.

68 i]> IS afiiiaik, qi}'ands, Ni wait, ni
Yah galaij) faur

kann, wlia |)U
gard ; ^ah haiia woi)ida.

qijjis.

69 Yah |nwi gasaiwhandci ina, aftra
j^aiiu faurastaudandam,

qijjaii

dui^^ann
patei sa |)izci int.

IS

70 i\>

aftra laugnida.

Yah afar
lei til, aftra |)ai atstandaiidans, qcjjun du
is, ....
Paitrau, Bi sunyai );izei
yah auk razda j^eina galcika I'st.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

67 And da hco gcseah Petrum wyrm-
ende, da cwje}) hco, Du waere mid dam
Nazareniscan Hselende.

68 Da sets5c he, and cwae)), Ic nat, ne
ne can, hwaet dii segst. And he code
da of dam cafer-tuue ; and se hana
creow.

69 Eft da hine gecneow oder |)inen,
hco ongan cwcdan to dam de dar abiitan
stodon, S6|)lice des ys of dam.

70 And he eft aetsoc. And eft da
ymbe lytel, da de a^t-stodon cwacdon
to Petre, S6|)lice dii eart of dam, Ga-
lileisc dii cart

71 I|> 'is dugann afaikan yah swaran,
patei ni kann })ana mannaii, l?aiiei ({\\n\>.

71 Da ongan he setsacan and swerian,
S6])es ne can ic daene man, de ge secgaj).

7 2 Yah an))aramma sinj^a liana wopida.
Yah gamunda Paitrus j^ata waurd swe
qa|) inima Icsus, patei faurj)ize hana
hrukyai twaini sinjjam, inwidis mik \)nm
sinjjam.

Yah dugann grcitan.

72 And da eft-sona creow se hana.
Da gemunde Petinis
Htelendcs
worde de he him sjcde, JE'r se hana
crawe tuwa, })riwa du me atsa^cst. Da
ongan he wcpan.

da^s

Chap. XV.

i Yah sunsaiw in maur-
gin, garuni tauyandans })ai auhumistans
gudyans, nii|>
|)aiin sinistam, yah bok-
aryani, yah alia so gafaurds, gabindaud-
ans losu, brahteduu ina at Peilatau.

Chap. XV.

i Da sona on mergen,
worhton da hcah-sacerdas hvra treniut
mid ealdrum, and boccrum, and eallum
werodum, and laeddon dame Ha-lend,
gebiindenne, and sealdon hine Pilato.

2 Yah frah ina Pcilatus, pu is piudans
1 1; is andhafyands qaj) du ininia,

J xuhuv 1
pu (|i|>i.s,

3 Yah wrohideduu ina |;ai auhumistans

2 Da acsode Pilatus hine, Eart dii
Tudca cyning ] Da andswarode he him,
Dii hit segst.
3 Da wregdon hine da hcah-sacerdas

gudynns lihi.

4 J[) Peilatus aftra frah ina, (ii})ands,
ISai, whan

Niu andhafyis ni waiht ?
filu ana j)uk weitwodyand 1

on mancgum jungum.

4 Eft Pilatus liine acsode, Ne and-
Ldca, hii micel-

swarast dii nan JMiig 1
um hi de wregeaj) 1

f, l\> Icsus jmnamais ni andhof, swaswc

sildak'ikida Pt'ilatus.

6

][; and dul|) wharyoh fralailot im

ainana bandyan, j)anci bt'dun.

7 Wasuh j)an sa haitana Barabbas, mi))
I'aini nii|) iiiima drubyaiidam gabuiidans,
j'aici in auhyodau maurj^r gatawidtduu.

5 Da ne andswarode se Hielend him

na niiire, swa da?t Pilatus wundrode.

6 On symbel-da?ge wa3S his gcwuna
dirt he him forgeafe jcnne gebiindenne,
swa hwylcne swa hi baedon.

7 Da baedon hi Barnd)an, se wa^s gc-
)>urh

biinden mid dam rapplingum, se
swic-cnuft man- sly ht geworhte.

XIV. 67.-XV. 7.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

255

67 And whanne sche hadde seyn Petre
warmynge him, sche biholdinge him
seith, And thou wast with Jhesu of
Xazareth.

68 And he denyede, seyinge, Nethir I
woot, nether I haue knowun, what thou
seist. And he wente forth bifore the
halle ; and anon the cok song.

69 Eftsone forsothe whanne a nother
hand mayde hadde seyn him, she bigan
for to seie to men stondinge aboute, For
this is of hem.

70 And he eftsone denyede. And aftir
a litil, eftsoone thei that stooden ny^,
seiden to Petre, Verily thou ert of hem,
forwhi and thou ert of Galilee.

.

.

71 Sothli he bigan for to curse and
swere, For I knowe not this man, whom
50 seyn.

72 And anon eftsoones the cok song.
And Petre bithou^te on the werd that
Jhesus hadde seid to him, Bifore the
cok
synge t^7yes, thries thou schalt
denye me. And he bigan for to wepe.

67 And when she sawe Petre warm-
ynge hym silfe, she loked on hym and
sayd, Wast not thou also with Jesus of
Nazareth 1

68 And he denyed it, sayinge, I knowe
hym not, nether wott I, what thou sayest.
And he went out in to the poorche ;
and the cocke crewe.

69 And a damsell sawe hym, and
agayne began to saye to them that stode
by, Thys ys won of them.

70 And he denyed yt agayne.

And
anon after, agayne they that stode by,
sayde to Peter, Suerly thou arte won off
them, for thou arte of Galile, and thy
speache agretli therto.

71 And he began to coursse and to
sweare, sayinge, I knowe nott thys man,
off whom ye speake.

7 2 And agayne the cocke crewe. And
Peter remembred the worde that Jesus
sayd vnto him, Before the cocke crowe
twyse, thou shalt deny me thryse. And
began to wepe.

Chap. XV.

i And anon the raorwe
maad, the hi3este prestis, makinge coun-
ceil with the eldere men, and scribis,
and al the counceil, byndinge Jhesu,
ledden, and bitooken to Pilat.

2 And Pilat axide him, Art thou kyng
of Jewis 1 And he answeringe seith to
him, Thou seyst.

3 And the hi3este prestis accusiden

liiin in maiiye thingis.

4 Pilat forsothe eftsoone axide him,
h< yinge, Thou answerist not ony thing?
'st tliou, in how manyc tliingis thei
usen thee]

; Forsothe Jhesus more no tliinj; an-
'•ride, so that Pilat schuldo wondrc.
'1 Forsoth by a Holenino day lie was
wit to leeue to hem oon bounden,
lom cucre thei axideu.

Forsotli there wjls he tliat was Hoid
inil)as, that was l)<)Undiin with Hlccris
<'t men, and that hadde dou manHlau3trc
in seducioun.^

Chap. XV. i And anon in the dawn-
ynge, heelde the hye jjrestes a counsell
with the seniours, and the scribes, and
also the whoole congregacion, and bounde
Jesus, and ledde hym awaye, and de-
lyvered hym to Pilate.

2 And Pilate axed hym. Arte thou the
kynge off the Jewes 1 And he answered
and sayde vnto hym, Thou sayest yt.
3 And the hye prestes accused hym off
many thynges.
4 Pylate axed hym agayne, sayinge,
Bchoolde,
Answerest thou nothyngc 1
liowe many thinges they lay vnto thy
charge ?

5 Jesus yett answered never a wordc,

so that Pihitc merveled.

6 Att the feast Pilate was wont to
dclyvre att their pleasure a presoner,
whomsoever they wolde desyre.

7 And there was one named Barrabns,
which hiye bounde witli them tlat
caused in surrettion, and in the in bur-
rection committed nmrtlier.

256

GOTHIC, 360.

8 Yah usc,'a2:L,'an(lei alia managci, du-
gunnun bidyaii, swaswe siutciuo tawida

1

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
8 And da he ferde, da ongan sco
menegeu bine biddan, swa heo symle
dyde.

[St. Mark

9 Da cwac'|> Pilatus, AVylle ge dait ic

1111.

9

\\>

\Vileidu
ludaie ?

Peilatus

andhof i'm,

qi|vands,

fraleitan

izwis

})ana

})iudan

eow forgyfe ludea cyning ]

10 Wissa auk, j^atci in nci[)is atgebun

10 He wiste, daet {^urh andan bine

I'na j)ai auliuniistaiis gudyans.

sealdon da heah-sacerdas.

i|>

11

jjai aulministans gudyans i'li-
wagidcHlun |)0 niauagein, ei mais Barab-
baii frulailoti im.

12 i]> Pcilatus aftra andliafyands qaj>
du ini, Wha nu wilci|j ei tauyau jjammei
(|i))ijj })iudaii ludaie?

1

Da ast}Tedon da bisceopas da mcn-

egu, diet he him Barrabau forgefe.

12 Eft Pilatus him andswarode, Hwa?t

do ic be ludea eyniuge 1

13 Ij? eis aftra hropidedun, Ushramci

13 Hi eft hrymdon and cwsedon, H6I1

"in a.

14 ifj) Peilatus qa)) du i'm, Wha allis
1\> eis mais hropi-

ubilis gatawida?
dedun, Ushramci ina.

15 1[> Peilatus wilyands jjizai managein
fullafahyan, fralailot im {jana Barabban,
i|) lesu atgaf, usbliggwands, ei ushrami})S
wesi.

16 I|) gadrauhteis gatauhun ina 'innana
praitoriaun, yah ga-

|)atei

gai'dis,
haihaitun alia hansa,

1st

bine.

14 Da saede Pilatus, Hwoet yfeles dyde
he ? Hi da3S de ma clypedon, A'hoh
liine.

15 Pilatus wolde da dam folce gc-
cweman, and forgef him Barraban, and
sealde him done Hjvlend, beswungeune,
diet he ahangen wacre.

16 Da laeddon da cempan bine on da^s
dom-ernes eafer-tun, and hi tosomne
call werod clypedon,

17 Yah gawasidedun i'na

jiaurpurai.
Yah atlagidedun ana ina jjaurneiiia wipya,
uswindandans ;

18 Yah dugunnun golyan 111a, Hails,

17 And scryddon bine mid purpuran.
And him onsetton jjyrnenne helm, liwiin-
dcnne ;

18 And ongunnon bine dus gretan,

))iudan ludaie.

19 Yah sloimn is haubi}) rausa. ynh
bispiwun ina; yah lagyandans kniwa
'inwitun ina.

Hal wes, dii ludea cyning.

19 And bcoton bine on da^t heafod
mid hreode, and spaetton him on ; and
hcora cneow bi«jfdon and bine ere-ead-
mcddon.

o

o

20 Yah bil'C bilailaikun ina, andwasi-
dcdiin ina |n'zai ])aurpurai, yah gawasi-
deiUni ina wastyoin swesaim, yah ustauh-
un I'ua, ci ushramidedeina i'na.

21 Yah undgri])un sumana mannc,
Primona Kwrcinaiu, qimandan af akra,
attan Alaiksandraus yah liufuus, ei uemi
galgan is.

20 And syddan hi bine bysmr}'don,
unscryddon bine dam purpuran, and
scryddon bine mid his
rcafum, and
la?ddon bine, da^t hi bine ahcngon.

21 And genyddon sumne wegfercndno,
Simonem Cyrcncum, cumcnde of dam
tiine, Alexandres fivder and Ivufi, diet
he his rode btere.

22 Yah attauhun ina ana naulgauj^a
gaskeirij), Whairneins

))atei

ist

sta)),

Btajis.

23 Yah gcbun iinma drigkan wcin inij)

sinwrna, i|> is ni nam.

22 And hi laeddon bine on da stowe
Golgotha, diet is on ure ge|>eode gereht,
Hcafodpannena stow.

23 And sealdon him gebiterod win,

and he hit ne onfeng.

5

;

9

;

XV. 8-23-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

257

8 And whaune the cumpany hadde
sti3e vp, he bigan for to preye, as he
euermore dide to hem.

9 Sothely Pilat answeride to hem, and
seide, Wolen 56 I leeue to 30U the kyng
of Jewis ?

10 Sothli he wiste, that the hi5este

prestis hadden taken him by enuye.

T I Forsothe the bischopis stireden the
cumpenye of peple, that more he schulde
leeue to hem Barabas.

12 Forsoth eftsoone Pilat answeringe
seith to hem, What therfore wolen 5e I
schal do to the kyng of Jewis 1

13 And thei eftsoone crieden, Crucifie

hym.^

14 Forsoth Pilat seide to hem, Sothli
what of yuel hath he don ] And thei
crieden more, Crucifie him.

1

Sothli Pilat willinge for to do ynow
to the peple, lefte to hem Barabas, and
bitook to hem Jhesu, smyten"*" with
scourgis, that he schulde be crucified.

16 Forsothe kny3tis ledden him with-
ynne, in to the floor of the moot halle,
and clepiden to gidere al the cumpenye
of kny3tis,

17 And clothiden him -with purpur.
And thei foldinge a corowne of thornes,
puttiden to him

18 And bigunnen for to greet him,

sayinge, Hail, thou kyng of Jewis.

19 And thei smyten his heed with a
reede, and bispatten him ; and puttinge
her knees thei worshipiden him.

20 And aftir that thei hadden scornyd
him, thei vnclothiden him fro purpur, and
clothedyn him with his clothis, and led-
den him, that thei schulde crucifie him.
21 And thei constreyneden sum man
passynge forth, Symount of Syrencn,
comynge fro the town, the fadir of Alys-
andre and Ilufo, that he schulde take
his cross.

22 And thei ledden him in to a place
Golgotha, that is interpretid,^ the place
of Caluario.

23 And thei jnucn him for to drynkc
wyn meddclid with myrrc, and he took
not.

8 And the people called vnto hym, and
began to desyre off hym, accordinge as
he had ever done vnto them.

9 Pylate answered them, and sayd,
Wyll ye that I loose vnto you the kynge
off the Jewes 1

10 For he knewe, that the hye prestes

had delyvered hym off envy.

11 Butt the hye prestes had moved
the people, that he shulde rather delyvre
Barrabas vnto them.

12 Pylate answered agayne and sayd
vnto them. What wyll ye then that I do
with hym whom ye call the kynge of
the Jewes 1

13 And they cryed agayne. Crucify

hym.

14 Pylate sayde vnto them. What
harme hath he done 1 And they cryed
the moore fervently, Crucifi hym.

15 Pylate willinge to content the peo-
ple, loused Barrabas, and delyvered Je-
sus scourged, for to be crucifyed.

16 And the souddeers- ledde hym a-
waye, in to the commen hall, and called
togedder all the whoole multitude,

17 And they clothed hymwyth purple.
And they plated a croune off thornes,
and crouned hym with all

18 And began to salute hym, Hayl,

kynge off the Jewes.

1

And they smoote hym on the heed
with a rede, and spatt apon hym ; and
kneled doune and worsheped hym.

20 And when they had moocked him,
they toke the purple off him, and put
his awne cloothes on him, and ledde him
oute, to crucify him.

21 And they comi^elled won that
by, called Simon of Cereno,
passed
which cam oute of the felde, and was
to
father
Ijeare hys crosse.

off Alexander and Bufus,

22 And they brought him to a place
named (Jolgotha, which is by intcrpre-
tacion, the place off deed mens scouUes.
23 And they gave him to <lrynke wyne
myngled with mirrc, butt he receuved
it not.

258

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

24 Yah usliramyaiKlans I'na

distlail-
yancl wastyos is, wairpandans hlauta ana
Jjos, wharyizuli wlia nemi.

24 And da hi hine ahengon hi dseldon
his real, and hlotu wurpon, hwoet gehwa
name.

;

wlieila

Jn-idyo, yah

25 Da waes imdcm-tid, and hi ahengon

25 Wasuh ))an
ushrainidcdun i'na.

26 Yah was ufarmcli fairiuos "is ufar-

mcli|), Sa |)iudaiis ludaie.

27 Yah m\\> imrna ushramidcdun twans
taihswoii; yah

vvaidedyans, ainana af
aiiiana af hleidumeiu is.

28 Yah usfulhioua ))ata gamelido J)ata
qij^auo, Yah mij) unsibyaim rahiii|)S was.

29 Yah j)ai faurgaggandans wayameri-
dcdun ilia, wi|)Oudans haubida sciua, yah
! sa gatairands j)0 alh, yah
qijjandans,
bi ]>rius dagans gatimryands ]>o ;

hine,

26 And ofer-ge^vl'it his gyltes

wa?s

awriten, Iudea cynino.

27 And hi ahengon mid him twegen
scea})an, anne on his swydran healfe,
and oderne on his wynstran.

28 Da waes diet fjewrit frefvlled da't
cwy}>. And he wajs mid uiirihtwisum
geteald.

29 And da de for})-st6pon hine grcmc-
don, and hyra heafod cwehton, and dus
cwaedon, Wala ! se towyrp}; divt tcnipel,
and on |)rim dagum eft getimbraj>

30 Nasei ]>uk silban, yah atsteig af

30 Gehsel de sylfne, of

da3re rode

)>amma galgiii.

stigende.

31 Samaleiko yah J)ai

auhumlstans
giidyans bihiikandans iiia, mij) sis inisso,
j»aini bokaryain, qc})un, Aujjarans
mi})
ganasida, i|) sik silban ni mag ganasyan.

31 Eall-swa da hcah-saccrdas bysm-
riende, betwux dam bocerum, cwaedon,
O'dre he hale gedyde, hine sylfne he ne
ma?g halne gedon.

32 Sa Christus, sa ])iudans Israelis,
atsteigadau nu af jiamiua galgin. ei ga-
Yah |\^i
saiwhaima, yah galaubyaima.
mij)ushrainidaus imma, idweitidcdun iin-
ma.
33 Yah bil'C war]) wheila saihsto, riqis
war}) ana allai air})ai und wheila niun-
don.
34 Yah niiiiidon whcilai wopida Icsus
(jijiaiids, Ailoe, Ailoe,
Btibnai mikilai,
lima 8ibak})anei, })atei ist gaskciri|), Gu})
mcins, Gu}' meins, duwhc mis bilaist 1

32 Crist, Israhela coming, astige nu
of rode, da't we geseon, and gclyfon.
And da de him mid hangodon, wa-ron
him mid gebundene.

33 And dicrc syxtan tide, wurdon
jjystru gewordene geond ealle eor}um
od non-tide.

34 And to non-tide se Iliclcnd clypodc
mycelre stemne, Ileloi, llcloi, loma sab-
battani, dcet is on lire ge})eode, Wm
God, min God, hwi forlcte dii me ?

35 Yah sumai }>ize atstandandane ga-
liausyandans qc}nin, Sai! llclian wopci}).

36 ])ra[;yands |)an ains, yah gafullyands
Bwaiii akeitis, galagyaiids ana rails, dijiL^k-
ida ina, <ji})aiuls, Let, ci saiwhaiii, (pinaiu
llelias athafyan ina.

37 i\) losus, aftra letands stibiia iiiikila,

uzon.

38 Yah faurahah alhs disskritnoda in

35 And sumc de dar abiiton stodon
and dis i^'ohyrdon, hi cwaedon, Nii ! des
clypa}) lU'liain.

36 Da arn hyra an, and fylde ane
s])ingan mid ccode, and on hrcod sette,
and him drincan
sealde, and cwa^j),
Lacta}), dapt we geseon, liwa^der Helias
cumc hine nyder to settanne.

37 Se Ila'lend, da asende his stcfne,

and for})-ferdc.
38 And da'S

temples wah-rift was

;

!

XV. 24-38.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

259

24 And thei crucifiynge him departiden
lot, who what

sendinge

clothis,

bis
schulde take.

25 Forsoth it was the thridde our,"'" and

thei crucifieden him.

26 And the title of his cause was writ-

un^ Jhesus of Nazareth, kyng of Jewis.

27 And thei crucifien with him twey
theues, oon at the ri3thalfj and oon at
his lefthalf.
» 28 And the prophecie is
fulfild that
seith, And he is gesside"*" with -w^ckide
men.

29 And passinge forth thei blasfem-
yden him, mouynge her heedis, and sey-
inge, Fj3 ! thou that
distroyest the
temple of God, and in thre dayes a5en
bildest it

24 And when they had crucified hym
they parted hys
garmentes, castinge
loottes for them, what every man shulde
have.

25 And it was aboute the thyrde houre,

and they crucifyed hym.

26 And the title of the cause of hys
deeth was wrytten. The kynge of the
lewis.

27 And they crucifyed with him two
theves, the one on his ryght honde, and
the other on hys lifte honde.

28 And the

scripture was fulfilled
which sayeth. And he was counted
amonge the wicked.

29 And they that went by rayled on
hym, waggynge their heedes, and say-
inge, A !
wretche that destroyest the
temple, and byldest yt in thre dayes j

30 Thou comynge down fro the cros,

30 Save thy silfe, and come doune

make thi self saf.

31 Also and the hi^este prestes scorn-
ynge him, ech to other, with scribis,
Crist, kyng of Yrael, maade
seiden,
othere men saf, he maye not saue him
silue.

32 Come he down now fro the cross,
And thei that
puttedyn
him,

that we se, and bileue.
weren crucified
with
wrong ^ to him.

33 And the sixte our ^ maad, derk-
nessis ben maad vpon al the ertlie til in
to the nynthe our.^

34 And in the nynthe our Jhesus
criede with gi'eet vois, seyynge, llcloy,
Heloy, lamazabatany, the which inter-
pretid is, My God, my God, whi"*" hast
thou forsake me ]

35 And summe of men stondinge
aboute heeringe seiden, Lo ! he clcjjitli
Hely.

36 Sothli oon rcnnynge, and fillinge a
sponge with vyncgre, and j)uttingc a-
boute to a rccde, 5aue him (Irynkc, scy-
inge, Suffrc 30, sc we, if Hely come for
to do hym down,

37 Forsoth Jhesus, a greet vois sent

out, deiedc.^

from the crosse.

31 Lyke wyse also mocked him the
bye preestes, amonge themselves, whyth
the scribes, and sayde. He saved other
men, hym silfe he cannot save.

32 Lett Christ, the kynge of Israel,
nowe descende from the crosse, that we
And they that
maye se, and beleve.
were crucified with him, checked hym
also.
33 And when the sixte houre was
come, darknes aroose over all the crtli
vntill the nynthe houre.

34 And att the nynthe houre Jesus
crycd with a loude voyce, sayinge, Eloi,
Eloi, lama sabaththani, which is yf yt
be interpreted. My God, my God, why
hast thou forsaken me ?

35 And some off* them that stode by
wlicn they herde that sayde, Behoolde
he calleth for Helias.

36 And won ran, and filled a spongo
full off*venegcr, and putt yt on a rede,
and gave it hym to drynke, sayinge^,
Lett hym alone, let vs se, whither iiclias
wyll come and take liym doune.

37 l>utt JesuH cryed with a loude voyce,

and gave vppc the gooste.

38 And the veil of tlic temple is kitt

38 And the vaylc off the temple did

H 2

;

200

COTIITC, 360.

twa iiipaj)ro uiul tlalaj>.

39 Gasaiwhands jjan sa hundafaj^a, sa
atstamlands "in andwairj^ya 'is, |)atei swa
hropyands uzon, qa|^, Bi suuyai, sa manna
sa sunus was Gujjs.

ANGLO-SAXOK, 995.

[St. Mark

tosHtcn on twa of ufeweardum od neotte-
weard.
39 Da sc hundred-man, de clar stod
agen, gcseah da^t se Haelend swa clyp-
iende for|>-ferde, he cwiej), S6|)lice, des
man waes Godes sunu.

40 AVcsunu}>-|jan qinons fairra})ro saiwh-
andcins, in |)aimci was Marya so Mag-
dalene, yah Marya lakobis |)is minniz-
ins, yah losczis ai|;ei, yah Salome.

41 Yah )7an was in

Galeilaia, yah
laistidedun ina, yah andbahtidedun im-
ma, yah an|)aros managos, jjozei mij^'id-
dyedun imma in lairusalem.

40 And da wif wscron feorran bcheald-
ende, and betwux dam wa?s seo ^Mag-
Maria, and Maria lacobes
dalenisce
modor [dnes gingran, and losepes mcd-
er,]^ and Salomejo.

41 And da he W£es on Galilea, h^
fyligdon him, and him l^enedon, and
manega cdre, de him mid ferdon on
lerusalem.

42 Yah yu))an at andanahtya waur})-
anamma, unte was paraskaiwe saei ist
fruma sahbato,

43 Qmiands losef af Arcima})aias, ga-
guds ragineis, saei was silba bcidands
|>iudangardyos Gujis; ananan)>yands ga-
lai|) inn du Peilatau, yah ba]i |)is Icikis
lesuis.

44 1[) Pcilatus sildaloikida, ei is yiijmn
Yah athaitands })an hundafii]?,

gaswalt.
frah ina, yuj^an gadau])iiodedi

45 Yali finjjands at j^amma hundafada,

42 And da sefen wres geworden, da}t

waes parasceue dajt is eer Sfeter-da^ge,

43 Da com losep, se a?dcla gcrefa, of
Arimathia, se
ge-
anbidode ;
to
Pilate code, and bsed da^s Hselendes
lichaman.

sylfa Godes rices
in

and he dyrstiglice

44 Da ^vundrode Pilatus, gif he da
Da cly])ode he daMie
gyt forJ)-ferde.
hundredman, and bine ahsode, hwi^der
lie dead waere ;
45 Da he wiste daet, da agef he done

fragaf |)ata leik losefa.

lichaman losepe.

46 Yah usbugyands Icin, yah usnim-
ands ita, biwaiid {nimnia leina, yah ga-
lagichi ita in hlaiwa |)atei was gadraban
us staina, yah atwalwida stam du daura
|)is hlaiwis.

46 Da bohte losep ane scytan, .

.

and bine dar-on befeold, and on byrgene
lede seo wtes of stane aheawen, and
wylte aune stiiu to da^re b^Tgcne dura.^

47 I

J)

^farya so ^fagchdcnc, yah Marya

losczis scwhuii, whar galagij)3 wesi.

47 Da com ^laria Magdalene, and
losepes Maria and bcheoldon, hwar he
gcled waere.

CirAP. XVT.

I Yah inwisandins sab-
batc dagis, ]\raryii so Magdaloiu', yah
Marya so lakobis, yah Salome usbauht-
cdun aromata, ei atgaggandeins gju^allj-
odeikMiia Vna.

2 Yah filu air |ns dagis afarsal)batc,
atiddyedun du JMimma hlaiwa, at urrinn-
andiu sunuiu.

CiiAP. XVI.

I And da snpternes
da\g wa'S agan, seo Magdalenisce Maria,
ami lacobcs Maria, and Salomcji3 bohton
wyrt gemang, divt hi comon and bine
smyredon.

^

2 And swvde ser anum reste-da^fjc,
comon to diere byrgene, up-asprungeure
sunnan.

J

XV. 39--XVI. 2.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

261

in to tweyne fro the
down.^

hi3este

til to

39 Forsotli centurio seynge, the which
stood euene a^enst, for so criynge he
hadde deied, seith, Verrili, this man was
Goddis sone.

40 Sothli there weren and othere wym-
men biholdinge fro affer, among whiche
was Mary Mawdeleyn, and Mari of
James the lasse, and modir of Joseph,
^nd Salome.

41 And whanne Jhesus was in Galilee,
thei folowiden him, and mynystriden to
him, and manye othere wymmen, that
to gidere sti3eden vp with him to Jeru-
salem.

42 And whanne euentyd was now
maad, for it was the euentyd bifore the
saboth,

43 Joseph of Armathie, the noble de-
curioun,^ cam, the which and he was
abidinge the rewme of God ; and hardily
he entride in to Pilat, and axide the
body of Jhesu.

44 Forsothe Pilat wondride, if he hadde
now deied. And centurio axid to,"*" he
axide him, if he were now deed ;

45 And whanne he hadde knowun of
centurio, he 3af the body of Jhesu to
Joseph.

46 Sotlili Joseph byingc him lynnen
cloth, and doynge him doun, wlappedc
in the lynen cloth, and puttide in a
newe sepulcre that was hewen in a
stoon, and walewid to a stoon at the
mouth of the sepulcre.
47 Marie Mawdeleyn forsothe, and
Marie of Joseph bihccldcn, where he
was putt.

rent in two parties from the toppe to
the boottome.
39 And the vnder captayne, which stode
before hym, sawe that he so cryed and
gave vppe the gooste, and he sayd,
Truely, this man was the sonne of
God.

40 There were also wemen a good waye
of beholdinge him, amonge whom was
Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother
of James the lytle, and of Joses, and
Mary Salome.

41 Which alsoo when he was in Galile,
folowed hym, and minstred vnto him,
and many other wemen, which cam vppe
with hym to Hierusalem.

42 And nowe when nyght was come,
because it was the even that goeth ' be-
fore the saboth,
43 Joseph ofArimathia, a noble senatour,
which also loked for the kyngdom of
God, cam ; and went booldly vnto Pylate,
and begged the boddy off Jesu.

44 Pylate merveled, that he was alreily
deed. And called vnto hym the vnder
captayne, and axed of him, whether he
had bene eny whyle deed ;

45 And when he knewe the trueth off
the vnder captayne, he gave the boddy
to Joseph.

46 And he bought a linncn cloothe,
and toke hym doune, and wrapped hym
in the lynnen cloothe, and layde hym in
a tombe that was hewen oute of the
rocke, and rooUed a stone vnto the dore
off the sepulcre.
47 And Mary Magdalen, and Mary

Jose beheld, where he was layde.

Chap. XVI.

i And wlmnnc the sab-
oth hadde passid, Marie Maw(h;l(;yn, and
Marie of James, and Salome bou^tcn
oynemcntis, tliat thei comyugc schuldcn
anoyntc Jhesu.

2 And ful cerly in oon of woke dayes,
thei canien to the sepulcre, the Buiine
now sprungen vp.

CiiAP. XVI. I And when the sabbotli
daye was past, Mary MagdaK'.n, and
Mary Jacobi, and Salome l)ought oynt-
they myght come and
mentes, that
anoyiit him.

2 And yerly in the morning*; the ncxlc
daye whv.v the sabboth day, tln^y cam vnto
the sepulcre, when the sun was risen.

1

1

2r)2

GOTHIC, 360.

3 Yali qc))iin du sis misso, AVlias af-
Avahvyai uusis j'aua stain at" daurom )?is
blaiwis ?

A Yah insaiwhandcins gaumidcdun |>an\-
niei afwahvi|)S ist sa stains, was auk
mikils abraba.

5 Yah atgaggandcins in })ata hlaiw
gascwhun yiiggalau)? sitandan, in taihs-
vvai Ijiwaibidana wastyai whcitai ; yah
usgeisnodedun.

6 paruh qaj) du i'm, Ni faurlitci|> i'zwis;
lesu sokeij> Nazoraiu })ana ushraniidan ;
nist her, urrais ;
]?ana staj> ))arei
galagidcdun iua.

sal !

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St Mark
3 And cwsedon him betwynan, Hwa
awylt us dysne stau of daerc byrgene
dura 1

4 Da hi hi besilwon hi gcsawon dajue
Stan aweg awyltne,
he wa?8
swyde mycel.

s6j?lice

5 And da hi eodon on da byrgene hi
gesjiwon anne geongne, on da swydran
healfe sittende, hwitum gegyrhin ofer-
wrogenne ; and hi da forhtodon.

6 Da cwse]} he to him, Ne forhtige gc
na; ge secaj? di^ne Nazareniscan Haclend
ahangenne ; he aras, nis he her ; her is
seo stow daer hi hine ledon.

7 Akei gaggi|>, qi|)iduh du siponyam
is, yah du Paitrau, })atei faurbigaggij)
jjaruh iua gasaiAvhij),
izwis in Galeilaian ;
swaswe qaj> izwis.

8 Yah usgaggandeins af j^amma hlaiwa
sat iyos rciro
ga|)hiuhun ;
yah usfihnei, yah ni qe|)un mannhun
waiht, ohtedun sis auk.

dizuh }ian

9 Usstandands jjan i'n maurgin fniniin
sabbato, ataugida frumist Maryin jjizai
^lagchdene, af J^izaiei uswarp sibun un-
huljjons.

10 Soh gaggandei gataih Jjaini niij) 'ini-
nia wisandani, qainondam yali grctand-
am.

1

Yah eis hausyandans J>atci

libai|>,
yah gasaiwhaus war|) fram izai, ni ga-
laubidedun.

12 Afaruli j^an Jjata

7 Ac fara)>, and secgaj) his leoming-
cnihtum, and Petre, divt he g?e]j toforan
cow on Galilcam ; dar ge hine geseoj),
swa he eow ssede.

8 And lii ut-eodon and flugon fram
dsere byrgene ; and waeron afacrcde for
drere gesyhj^e de hi gcsawon, and big
nanum men naht ne saedon, s6|)lice hi
liim adrcdon.^

9 Dii he aras on seme morgcn on
reste-daege, seryst he setywde da^re Mag-
daleniscan ^larian, of dajre he ut-adraf
seofon deofol-seocnyssa.

10 And heo da ut-eode and hit dam
cydde de mid him waeron, heofendum
and wependum.

1

Da hi gehyrdon d.Tt he Icofode,
and hi hine gesawon, da ne gelyfdon
hi him.

12 -^fter dam him twiim he wa?s
rctywed on odrum hiwe, him on done
tiin farendum.

T3 And lii da foron and da't odrum

cyddon, and hi him ne gelyfdon. ''^

14 Dti at nehstan, lie a^tywde him
rendlefcne, dar hi a^tga^dere saeton, and
ta?ldc hvra uncfcleaffulnossc, and hyra
hcortan hcardnessc, fordam de hi nc
gelyfdon dam, de hine gesawon of deajjo
arisan.

15 And he sacde him, Faraj) into ealne
middan-eard, and bodiaj) godspell ealre
gesccafte.

16 Se de gelyf|i, and gefullod bi|>, se
bi}i hal ; s5J)lice sc de ne gelyf]>, se bi|)
gcnyderod.

1

;

6
1

XVI. 3-i6.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
3 And thei seiden to gidere, Who schal
turne a^en to vs the stoon fro the dore
of the sepulcre ]
4 And thei biholdinge sy5en the stoon
walewid awey, forsoth it was ful greet.

5 And thei goynge jn into the sepulcre
sy3en a ^ong oo7i, hilid with a whit stoole,
sittinge at the rijt half j and thei weren
abaist.^

6 The which seith to hem, Nyle ^e
drede ; ^e seken Jhesu of Nazareth cru-
cified ; he hath risun, he is not heere
lo ! the place where thei puttiden him.

7 But go 5e, seye ^e to his disciplis,
and to Petre, for he schal go*byfore 50U
in to Galilee ; there 5e schulen se him,
as he seide to 50U.
8 And thei goynge out fledden fro the
sepulcre ; forsothe drede and quakynge
hadde assaylid hem,''" and to no man thei
seiden ony thing, forsoth thei dredden.

9 Sothly Jhesus, ryslnge erly in the
first day of the wouke, apperide firste to
Mary Mawdeleyn, of whom he hadde
cast out seuene deuelis.

10 She goynge tolde to hem that
weren with him, hem weylinge and wep-
ynge.

1

And thei heeringe that he lyuede,

and was seyn of hir, bileueden not.

12 Sothli after thes thingis tweyne of
hem wandringe, he is schewid in an
other lyknesse ^ to hem goynge in to a
toun.

13 And thei goynge tooklen to othere,

nethir tliei bileuyden to hem.

14 Forsoth at the lastc, hem cnlcucnc
restinge, Jhesus apperide to hem, and
reprouyde the vnbileuc of hem, and the
hardncsse of hcrtc, for thei bileuyden
not to hem, that haddcn seyn him to
haue risun fro dccdc.

15 And he seide to liem, 5c goynge in
to al the world, preche the gospel to
ech creature.

16 He that schal ]>ileuc, and schal ])c
baptisid,^ schal be sauyd ; sothli he that
schal bileue not, schal be dampncd.

TYNDALE, 1526.

263

3 And they said won to another. Who
shall rolle awaye the stone from the
dore off the sepulcre 1
4 And when they behelde yt they sawe
how the stone was rolled awaye, for it
was a very greate won.

5 And they went in to the sepulcre
and sawe a yonge man, sittinge on the
ryght syde, cloothed in a longe white
garment ; and they were abasshed.
6 He sayd vnto them, Be nott afrayed ;
ye seke Jesus of Nazareth which was
crucified ; he ys rysen, he ys nott here ;
behoolde ! the place where they putt
hym.

7 Butt go youre waye, and tell his
disciples, and namly Peter, that he is
goone before you in to Galile ; there
shall ye se hym, as he sayde vnto you.

8 And they went oute quicly and fleed
from the sepulcre ;
for they trembled
and were amased, nether said they eny
to eny man, for they were
thinge
afrayed.

9 When Jesus was risen, the morowe
after the sabboth daye, he appered fyrst
to Mary Magdalen, oute off whom he
cast seven devyls.

10 And she went and toolde them that
were with hym, as they morned and
weppte.

1

And when they herde that he was
alive, and had appiered to her, they
beleved it not.

12 After that he appered vnto two of
them in a straunge figure, as they walked
and went in to the country.

13 And they went and toolde it to the
remnaunt, and they bclcvcd them nether.
14 After that, he appered vnto the
eleven, as they sate at meatc, and cast in
their tetlic their vnbclefe, and hanlnca
off hcrtc, be cause they bclcvcd not
them, which had scnc hym after his
resurrcccion.

15 And he sayd vnto them, Goo ye in
to all the wooildo, and preache the gos-
pcll to all crcatiuH.

1

Whosoever bclcvcth, and ys luibf isod,
and whosoever bclcvcth

shalbe
nott, shalbc dampncd.

.safe ;

2G4

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Mark

17 Das tacnu fyliaj> dam, tie p^clyfaj>.
On ininum naman lii deofol-scocnessa
ut-clrifa{) ; hi spreca)) niwTim tuugum ;

18 Nseddran hi afyrra|> ; and him nc
dera|>, deah hi hwa3t dcadboerhccs drinc-
Ofer seoce hi hyra handa setta)',
on.
and hi bcoj? hale.

19 And ^vitodlice Drihten Haclcnd,
syddan he to him spra3C, he wics on
heofonum afangcn, and he sit on Godcs
swdran healfe,

20 S6))h'ce hi da farendc re^^diwar bodc-
don, Drihtnc mid-wyrcendiini, and trym-
mendre sprsece aeftcr-fyligcndum tacn-
um.

8

;

8
9

;

XVLI7-20.] WYCLIFFE,J389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

265

17 Forsoth these tokenes schulen sue
In my name
hem, that schulen bileue.
thei schulen cast out fendis ; thei schulen
speke with newe tungis ;

1

Thei schulen do awey serpentis

and if thei schulen drynke ony venym,'''
it schal not noye hem.
Thei schulen
putte hir hondis vpon sike men, and
thei schulen haue wel.

19 And sothli the Lord Jhesu, aftir
that he hadde spoke to hem, is takun
vp in to heuene, and sittith on the ri3t-
half of God.

20 Sothli thei gon forth prechiden
euerywhere, the Lord worchinge with,
and conferminge the word with signes
folowinge.

17 And these signes shall folowe them,
In my name they shall
that beleve.
cast oute devyls j and shall speake with
newe tonges

1

And shall kill serpentes ; and yf
they drynke eny dedly thynge, yt shall
They shall laye their
nott hurte them.
hondes on the
sike, and they shall
recover.

1

So then when the Lorde had spoken
vnto them, he was receaved in to heven,
and sate on the right honde of God.

20 And they went forth and preached
every where, and the Lorde wroght with
them, and confirmed their preachynge
with myracles that folowed.

AIWAGGELYO

HER OXCIXNEp

D.ET GODSPELL

JJAIRH

^FTER

LUKAN ANASTODEIP.

LUCAS GERECEDNESSE.

Chap. I.

i Unte raihtis managai
|)0S ga-

bi

(liigunnim mclyan 'insalit,
fuUaweisidous iii uiis waihtius,

Chap. I."^

manega j?ohton cta^ra }unga race
endebyrdan, de on us gefyllede synd,

i Forctam tte wTtodllce
ge-

2 Swaswe anafulhun unsis, jjaici fram
fi'umistin silbasiunyos, yah andbalitos
wesun jjis waurdis,

2 Swa us betaehton, da de hit of frym|>e
gesawon, and ditre sprecce |)cuas wicr-
on,

3 Galcikaida yah mis yah Alimin
"Weiliainina, fram anastodcinai aUaim
glaggwuba afarlaistyandin, gahahyo j>us
melyan, batista paiaufeihi,

4 Ei gakunnais, |?ize bi jjoei galaisijjs

'is waurde asta]>.

5 Was, 'in dagam Ilcrodes, ])iiidanis
ludaias, gudya, namiu Zakarias, us afar
Abiyins, yah qeins
daulitrum
Aharons, yah namo "izos Aileisabai]?.

us

'is

6 Wcsunuh |)an garailita ba 'in and-
allaira
Frauyins,

wairjiya
aiiabusnim yah garailitcim
unwaha.

Guj'S, gaggandona in

7 Yah ni was im barnc, untc was
framahh-a

yali

])a

Ailcisabai}j
dagc scinaizc wcsuu.

stairo,

8 War|) |)an, mi|)|)anci gudyinoda is, Vn
wikon kuiiyis sciiiis in andwairjjya Clujis,

9 P)i biuldya gudyinassaus, Idauts im-
ma urrium du salyan, atgaggands in
alh Frauyins.

3 Me gc)>uhte .... geornlice eallum
od endcbyrdnesse, ^^Titan de, dii se Sel-
esta Theophilus,

4 D»t du oncnawe dnera worda s6))-

fa^stnesse, of dam do du gelaered eart.

5 On Herodes dagum, ludca cyningcs,
wses sum sacerd, on naman Zacharias,
of Abian tune, and liis wff wa^s of
A'aroncs dohtrum, and hyre nama wa^s
Elizabeth.

6 S6j)lice hig waeron butu rilitwise
bcforan Gode, gangende on eallum his
beboduni
biitan
wrohte.

rihtwisnessum,

and

7 And hig na^fdon nan beam, fordam
de Eliza])eth wa^s unbcrende, and hig
on heora dagum butu for|)-eodon.

8 S6))lice wa3s geworden, da Zarhariag
liis sacerdhades breac, on his gcwrixles
endebyrdnessc beforan Gode,

9 ^fter geAmnan da^s

Idotes, he code da}t he his
sette, da he on Godes tempel code.

sacerdhades
oftrunge

10 Yah alls liiuhma was mnnagcins

10 Eall wcrod da?s folces wa^s ute,

bcidandans uta, whcilai |>wmiamiiis.

gebiddcudc on dare oflfrunge timan.

HERE BTGTNNETH

THE GOSPEL

OF

LUKE.

THE GOSPELL

OFF

S. LUKE.

Chap. I.

i Forsothe for manye men
enforceden to ordeyne the tellyng of
thingis, whiche ben fillid in vs,

2 As thei that seyn atte the blgyn-
nyng, and weren ministris of the word
bitaken,

3 It is seen also to me, hauynge alle
thingis diligentli bi ordre, to write to
tbee, thou best Theofile,

4 That thou knowe the treuthe of tho

wordis, of whiche thou art lerned.

5 Thcr was sura prest, Zacharie by
name, in the dayes of Eroude, kyng of
Judee, of the sort of Abia, and his wyf
of the dou3tris of Aaron, and hir name
ElizaVjeth.

6 Sothli thei bothe weren iuste bifore
Ood, goynge in alio the maundementis
iiiid iustifyingis of the Lord, with outcn
pleynte.

7 And a sonc was not to hem, for that
Kh*za]>eth was l>areyne, and bothe hadden

m forth fer in her dayes.
> Sothli it was don, whanne Sacharic
13 set in presthod, in the ordrc of his
>rt bifore God,
9 Vp tho custom of presthod, by sort
Ik; wcntc forth, that he cntrid in to tho
trmple of the Lord, schuldc puttc cn-

ncc.
10 And allc tlic multitude of tho pc])lo
was withouteforth, preiyngc in the our
<jf cncence.

Chap. J.

i For as moche as many
have taken in bond to compyle a treates
off thoo thynges, which are surely know-
en amonge vs,

2 Even as they declared them vnto vs,
which from the begynynge sawe them
with their eyes, and were minsters at
the doyng,

3 I determined also, as sone as I had
searched out diligently all thinges from
the begynynge, that then I wolde wryte
vnto the, goode Theophilus,

4 That thou myghtest knowe the cer-
tente off thoo thinges, whereof thou arte
informed.

5 In the tyme of Herode, kyngc of
lewry, there was a certayne prest, named
Zacarias, off the course of Abie, and his
wyfe was of the doughters of Aaron, and
her name was Elizabeth.

6 Booth were perfect before God, and
walked in all the lawcs and ordinacions
of the Lorde, that no man couldc fynde
fawte with them.

7 And they had no childc, be cause
that Elisabeth was barren, and booth
were wele stricken in age.

8 Hit cam to passe, as lie executed tho
prestos office, before God as his course
cam,

9 Accordingo to the custome of tho
prestos office, his lott was to bren odoures,
and went into the temple of the Lorde.

10 And all the multitude of pc()i)lo
were with out, in their prayers wliill
the odoures were abrcnnyngc.

7
2
1

2m

1

;

;

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

1

War)) }>an inima in siunai ag<:!;ilus
Frauyins, staiidaiids af tailiswon liuiisla-
stadis [jwmiaiiiins.

1

Yah gadrobnoda Zakarias gasaiwh-

auds, yah agis disdraus ina.

11 Da aitywdc him Drihtncs cngcl,
standende on (ta)S weofodcs swydran
healfe.

12 Da wear}) Zacharias gedrcfcd daet

geseonde, and him cgc on-hreas.

13 Qa|> |)an du 'imma sa aggllus, Ni
du|)C ci audhausida
ogs j)ii.s, Zakaria ;
ist hida J)eina, yah qens }>cina, Aileis-
abaijj, gal)airid sunu |jus, yah haitais
namo "is loliannen.

14 Yah wair|;i|> ))us fahcds yah sweg-
; yah mauagai m gabaur})ai is fag-

ni))a

inoiid.

15 Wair})i}) auk mikils in andwairjjya
Frauyins, yah wein yah lei}m ni drigkid,
yah Ahmius Wcihis gafullyada nauhjjan
in wambai aijjeins seinaizos.

13 Da cw8e|> se engel him to, No
ondrsed du de, Zacharias ; fordam dc
din ben ys gchyred, and din wif, Eli-
zabeth, de sunu ccnj), and du uemst his
naman lohannes.

14 And he by|> de to gefean and to
blisse ; and manega on his accnnednysse
gefagnia}).

15 S6)>lice he by|) macrc beforan Driht-
ne, and he ne drinc)? win ne l)cor, and
gefylled on Haligum Gastc
he by|)
donne gyt of hys modor innode.

16 Yah managans suniwe IsracHs ga-

16 And manega Israhela bcarna he

wandeij) du Frauyin Gu]?a ize ;

gecyrj) to Drihtne hyra Gode

1

in

Yah silba fauraqimid in andwair|?ya
is in alnnin yah mahtai Haileiins ; ga-
wandyan hairtona attane du barnam,
yah untalans
garaihtaize,
manwyan Frauyin managein gafahrida.

frodcin

18 Yah qa]? Zakarias du jjamma aggi-
lau, Biwhe kunnum |)ata 1 ik raihtis im
sincigs, yah qcns mcina framakh'ozei in
dagain seinaini.

19 Yah andhafyands sa aggilus qaj> du
imma, Ik im GalH'iel, sa standands in
yah insandi}>3 im
audwair})ya Gu}>s ;
rodyan du )>us, yah wailameryan j)us
])ata.

20 Yah siyais |)ahands, yah ni magands
rodyan und \n\\m dag, ci >vair}>ai J)ata ;
du))C ci ni galaul)ides waurdam mein-
aim, ]?oci usfuUyanda in mela scinamma.

17 And he gsej) tuforan him on gastc
and Elias mihtc ; da?t he fa?dera licortau
to heora bcarnum gec}Trc, and unge-
leaffulle to rihtwisra gleawscj'jDC, Drihtne
full-fremcd folc gegcarwian.

18 Da cw»j) Zacharias to dam engelc,
ic eom nu eald,

Hwauon wat ic dis 1
and min wif on h}TC dagum forJ)-c6de.

19 Da andswarode him se engel, Ic
eom Gabriel, ic de stande beforan Gode
and ic eom asend wid de sprecan, and
de dis bodian.

20 And mi !

dii byst suwigendc, and
du sprecan ne miht od done da'g, do
das |)ing gewurdaj) ; fordam dii nuiium
wordum nc gelyfdest, da beo|> on hyra
timan gcfyllede.

21 Yah was managci bcidandans Zaka-
riins, yah sildalcikidedun, Avha hitidcdi
ina in |)izai alh.

22 l^sgaggands Jmn ni malita du im
rodyan, yah fro{)Uu j)ammci siun gasawh
Yah silba was bandwyauds im,
in alh.
yah was dumbs.

23 Yah war)?, bi|7C usfulluodcdun dagos

2

And da»t folc wa s Zachariam ere-
anbidigende, and wiuidrigendc, diet ho
on dam temple l»t waes.

22 Da he lit-eode nc mihtc he liim to
sprecan, and hig oncneowon da^t he on
dam temple sume gesyh|>e geseah. And
he wnes bicniende him, and dum jnirh-
>nmede.

23 Da wajs gcwordcn, da his J>cnun

i

5
2

;

4
6
1

;

I. 11-23.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

2G9

11 Sothli an aungel of the Lord ap-
peride to him, stondinge on the ri^thalf
of the auter of ensence.

1

And Sacharie seynge was disturblid,

and drede felde doun on him.

13 Forsoth the aungel seith to hym,
Zacharie, drede thou not ; for thi preier
is herd, and Elizabeth, thi wyf, schal
here to thee a sone, and his name schal
be clepid John.

14 And ioye and gladinge schal be to
thee ; and manye schulen enioye in his
natyuite.

1

Sothli he schal be greet bifore the
Lord, and he schal not drynke wyn and
sydir, and he schal be fulfillid of the

« Hooly Gost 3it of his modir wombe.

16 And he schal conuerte manye of
the sones of Israel to the Lord God of
tem

17 And he schal go bifore him in the
spirit and vertu of Helye ; and he schal
tume the hertis of fadris in to sones,
and men out of bileue to the prudence
of iuste men, for to make redy a parfyt
peple to the Lord.

18 And Zachari seide to the aungel,
Wherof schal I wite this ? for I am old,
and my wyf hath gon fer in hir dayes.

19 And the aungel answeringe seide to
him, Forsoth I am Gabriel, that stonde
liy5 bifore God ; and I am sent to thee
for to speke, and to euangelise^ to thee
thes thingis.

20 And loo ! thou shalt be stille,^ and
thou schalt not mowe speke til in to the
'luy, in which thes thingis schulen be
>n ; for that thou hast not bileuyd to
my wordis, whiche schulen be fiUid in
^"r tymo.

.

T And the ])eplc was abidingc Za-
< lijiric, and thei wondridcn, for he taricdc
ill the temple.

22 Forsoth he gon out my5tc not spckc
to hem, and thei knewen that ho luuMo
And ho
yn a vicioun in thcteinple.
iH b«;kcnyngc to hctn, and dwellidc

<loun)b.

23 And it was maa<l, as the dayes of

1

There appered vnto him the Lordes
angell, stondinge on the right syde off
the aultre off odours.

12 And when Zacharias sawe hym
he was abasshed, and feare cam on
hym.

13 The angell sayde vnto hym, Feare
not, Zacary ;
ffor thy prayer is herde,
and thy wyfe, Helyzabeth, shall beare
the a Sonne, and thou shalt call his name
Jhou.

1

And thou shaltt have ioye and glad-
nes ; and many shall reioyce att his
birth.

15 For he shalbe greate in the sight
off God, and shall nether drynke wyne
ner stronge drynke, and he shalbe filled
with the Holy Goost even in his mothers
wombe.

1

And many off the chyldren off Is-
rahel shall . he tourne to their Lorde
God

17 And he shall goo before hym in the
sprete and power oft* Helyas ; to tourne
the herttes off the fathers to their chyl-
dren, and the vnbeleveres to the wisdom
off the iuste men, to make the people
redy ffor the Lorde.

18 And Zacary sayde vnto the angell,
Wherby shall I knowe this "i seinge that
I am olde, and my wyfe wele stricken
in yeares.

19 And the angell answered and sayde
vnto hym, I am Gabriell, that stonde in
the presens off" God ; and am sentt to
speake vnto the, and to shewe the this
glad tydinges.

20 And take hede !

thou shalt be
domme, and not able to speukc vntyll
the tyme, that these thingcs be per-
formed ; because thou belcvedst not my
wordes, which shalbe fulfilled in there
season.

21 And the people waytcd for Za-
carcas, and mervellcd, that he tarycd in
the temple.

22 When he cam onto he couldc not
8])eakc vnto them, and they pcrceavcd
that he had scno some vision in the
And ho beckencd vnto tlicni,
temple.
and rcmayned spcnchlcsHC.

23 And it fortuned, as sone as tlio

;

;

;

;

270

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

antlbaliteis "is, galai}> du gartla seiuarn-
Dia.

24 Afanih J)an

(lagans iiikiljjo
•vvarj) Aik'i.sal)ui)>, (icns is, yah galaug-
iiida sik nK'no})S Hmf, qijniiulei,

jjans

25 patei swa mis gatawida Fraiiya in
dagam, |)aimei insawh, afuiman idweit
mt'in in mannam.

dagas gcfyllede wscron, he fcrdc to his
huse.

24 S6|>lice sefter dagum Elizabeth, his
wif, ge-eacnodc, and heo bediglode hig
fif monj'as, and cwa?|>,

25 S6j)lice me Drihten gedyde dus on
dam dagum, (tc he geseah, minne hosp
betweox mauuum afyrran.'''

26 pamih jjan in mcno|> saihstin in-
sandijjs was aggilus Gabriel fram Gujja
in baurg Galeilaias, sei liaitada Nazar-

27 Du maga|>ai, in fragibtim abin, |)izci
namo losef, ns garda Dawcidis ; yah
namo J>izos niagaj)ais Mariam.

26 S6|)lice on dam syxtan monj^e wfes
asend Gabriel se engel fram Drihtne on
Galilea ceastre, dare nama woes Na-
zareth,

27 To beweddadrc fccmnan iinum were,

da3S nama waes losep, of Dauides huse
and daere faemnan nama wa^s Maria.

28 Yah galeijjands inn sa aggilus du

qaj),

audahafta
izai
Frauya mij) Jjus ; )5iu]>ido })U in qinom.

Fagino,

anstai

28 Da cwaej) se engel ingangende, Hal
wses du, mid gyfe gefylled ; Drihten
mid de ; dii eart gebletsod on wifum.

29 I{) si, gasaiwhandei, ga]>lalisnoda bi
innatgalitai is, yah ))ahta sis wlieleika
"wcsi so goleins, jjatei swa j)iu])ida izai.

29 Da wcarj) heo on his sprgcce ge-
drcfed, and jjohte hwiet seo greting
wsere.

30 Yah qaj? aggilus du izai, Ni ogs
))us, Mariam, bigast auk aust fram
Gii})a.

31 Yah sai ! ganimis in kill^ein, yah
sunu, yah haitais namo is

gabairis

Icsu.

30 Da cwa?}) se engel, Ne ondrjcd dii
de, Maria, soj^lice dii gyfe mid Gode
gemcttest.

31

Sojdice nu !

dii on innode ge-
eacnast, and sunu censt, and his naman
Ilaclend genenmest.

32 Sah wair})i}) mikils, yah sunus Hauh-
yali gibid imma Frauya

istins haitada ;
Gu}) stol Dawcidis, attins is,

32 Se by|) mare, and decs Hehstan
sunu genemned ; and him syl|> Drihten
God, his fieder Dauides setl,

33 Yali JMudano)) ufnr garda lakobis
ni

ayukdii)?, yah Jjiudinassaus

is

in

wairjjij) andeis.

34 Qa}) J>an Mariam du )iamma aggilau,
j^andoi aban ni

siyai

jjata,

AVliaiwa
kann 1

33 And he r:csa|? on ecnesse onlacobes

huse, and his rices ende nc byj>.

34 Da cwa^l' !Maria to dam engle, TIu
gewyr|' dis, fordani ic were ne oncnawc I

35 Yah andhafyands sa aggihis qaj>
du izai, Ahiiui Woihs atgaggi|) ana jmk,
yah mahts llauhistins ufarskadwcid [mis;
ci saei gabairada weihs, haitada
du})C
sunus Gu))S.

35 Da andswarode hyre se engel, Se
Halga Gast on de becym|>, and da^s
and
Healistan milit de ofer-sceadaj) ;
fordam daet halige de of de acenued
by|>, by)) Godes sunu genemned.

36 Yali Ral ! Aileisabaij), nijiyo jn-lna,
yah so inkiljx) sunau in aldoiniii sciiiam-
niM, yah sa ineno])s suihsta ist izai sei
haitada stairo

36 And mi !

Elizabeth, din

mjrge,
sunu on hyre ylde ge-cacnode, and des
monaj) ys hyre syxta seo is uubercnde
genemned

1

;

1

1.24-36.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

271

Lis office weren fulfillid, he wente in to
his hous.

24 Forsoth after dayes Elizabeth, his
conseyuede, and hidde hir fyue

wyf,
monethis, seyinge,
• 25 For so the Lord dide to me in the
dayes, in the whiche he bihelde, for to
take a wey my schenschip a mong men.

26 Sothely in the sixte monethe the
aungel Gabriel was sent fro God in to
a citee of Galilee, to which the name
Nazareth,

27 To a mayden, weddid to a man, to
whom the name was Joseph, of the
house of Dauith ; and the name of the
mayden Marie.

28 And the aungel gon yn to hir seide,
Heil, ful of grace ; the Lord he with
thee ; blessid be thou among wymmen.

29 Which, whanne she had herd, was
troublid in his word, and thou3te what
maner salutacioun this was.

30 And the aungel seide to hir, Ne
drede thou, Marie, sothli thou hast
founden grace anemptis God.

3

Loo ! thou schalt conseyue in the
wombe, and schalt here a sone, and thou
schalt clepe his name Jhesu.

32 This schal be greet, and he schal be
clepid the sone of the Hi3este ; and the
Lord God schal ^yue to him the seete
of Dauith, his fadir,
33 And he schal regne in the hous of
J.icob with outen ende, and of his rewme
Bchal be non ende.

34 Forsoth Marie seith to the aungel,
On what manere schal this thing be
don, for I knowe not man ?
35 And the aungel answeringe seide
to hir, The Plooly Gost schal come fro
ahoue in to thee, and the vcrtu of the
iii^este schfil schadcwc vnto thee ; thcr-
fore and that liooly thing tliat schal be
born of thee, schal be clepid the sone of
(Uxl

]6 And loo!
Elizabeth, thi cosyncss,
id sche hath conceyued a sone in hir
» Idc, and this monethe is the sixte to
hir that is clepid bareync

tyme off his office was oute, he departed
home in to his awne housse.

24 Affter thoose dayes his wife, Eliza-
beth, conceaved, and hid her silfe .v.
monethes, saynge,

25 This wyse hath God dealte with
me in the dayes, when he loked on me,
to take from me the rebuke that I
suffered a monge men.

26 And in the .vj. moneth the angell
Gabryel was sent from God vnto a cite
off Galile, named Nazareth,

27 To a virgin, spoused to a man,
whose name was Joseph, of the housse
of David j and the virgins name was
Mary.

28 And the angell went in vnto her
and sayde, Hayle, full of grace ; the
Lorde is with the ; blessed arte thou
amonge wemen.

29 When she sawe hym, she was a-
basshed att his saynge, and cast in her
mynde what maner of salutacion that
shulde be.

30 And the angell sayde vnto her,
Feare not, Mary, thou hast founde grace
with God.

3

Loo ! thou shalt conceave in thy
wombe, and shalt beare a childe, and
shalt call his name Jesus.

32 He shalbe greate, and shalbe called
the Sonne off the Hyest ; and the Lorde
God shall geve vnto hym the seate off
his father, David,

33 And he shall raygne over the housse
off Jacob for ever, and of his kyngdom
shalbe none ende.

34 Then sayd Mary vnto the angell,
Howe shall this be, seinge that I knowe
no man 1
35 And the angell answered and sayd
vnto her, The Holy Goost shall come
apon the, and the power off the Hyest
shall over shaddowc the ; therfore also
that holy thynge which shalbe borne,
shalbe called the sonnc of God.

36 And inarke ! thy coscn, Elizabeth,
hath also conceaved a Sonne in her oldo
age, and this is the .vj. moneth to her
which was called l)arren ;

"

272

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

37 Untc nist unmahtcig Gujja ainliun

37 Forctam nis sclc word mid Gode

waurdc.

unmihtelic.

38 Qaj) \)nn ^lariam, Sai !

]>iwi Frau-
yins ; Avair|)ai mis l)i waiirda jjeinamma.
Yah galaij) fairra izai sa aggilus.

38 Da cw3e|> Maria, Her is Drihtnes
j)inen ; geweorde me a^ftcr dinum worde.
And sc engel hyre fram-gewut.^

39 Usstandandei j^aii Mariam in jvaim
dagain, iddya in bairgaheiu suiumuudo,
'in baurg ludins.

40 Yah galaij) 'in gard Zakariins, yah

39 So}'lice on dam dagum aras Maria,
and ferde on muntlaud mid ofstc, on
ludeisce ceastre.

40 And eode into Zacharias huse, and

goHda Ailcisal)ai]).

41 Yah war]?, swe hausida Aileisabai|>
golein Mari'ins, laihiik barn in qi)?au
Yah gafulluuda Ahmins Weihis

izos.

Aileisabai]?,

42 Yah iifwopida stibnai mikilai, yah
qajj, piujndo |>u in qinom, yah |)iu|)ido
akran qijjaus J>einis.

43 Yah whaljro mis ))ata, ci qemi aijjei

Frauyins meiuis at mis ?

grette Elizabeth.

41 Da wa3s geworden, da Elizabeth
gehyrdc Marian gretinge, da gefiignode
cild on hyre innode. And da
dtet
wear]) Elizabeth Halegum Gaste ge-
fylled,

42 And heo cl}iiode mycelre stefne,
and ewa3|>, Du eart betwux wifum ge-
bletsod, and gebletsod is dines innodes
wsestm.

43 And hwanon is me dis, dajt mines
Drihtnes modor to me cume ?

44 Sai !

all is sunsei war}) stibna gol-
cinais j^einaizos in ausam meinaim, lai-
hiik J)ata barn in swigni]>ai in wambai
meinai.

45 Yah audaga so gAlaubyandei, j)atei
wair|)i[> ustauhts, ])ize rodidane izai fram
Frauyin.

44 Sona swa dinre gi'etinge stefn on
minum earum geworden wa}s, da fa^g-
node .... min cild on mlnuni

innode.

45 /Vnd eadig du eart, du de gelyfdest,-
djfit fulfremede synd da })ing de de fram
Drihtne gesaede synd.

46 Yah qa]) Mariam, Mikileid saiwala

46 Da cw«)) Maria, Min saw! mrersaj)

meina Fraiiyan,

47 Yah swegneid ahma meins du
Gu))a, nasyand meinamma.

48 Unte insawh du hnaiwcinai j)iiiyos
allis fram himma uu

scinaizos.
audagyand mik alia kunya.

Sai I

Drihten,
47 And min gast geblissode on Gode,
minum haelende.

48 Fordam de he geseah hys jvncnc
ead-modnesse. S6j)lice! heonon-forj) me
eadige secga}) ealle cneoressa.

49 Untc gatawida mis mikilcin

muhtciga, yah wcih namo is.

sa

49 Fordam de mc micele Jung dyde sc
de mihtig is, and hys nama ys halig.

50 Yah armnhairtci is in aldins aide,

50 And hys mild-heortncs of cncoresse

j'aim ogandam ina.

on cueoresse, hyne ondraxlendum.

f'yi Gatawida swin])cin in arma seinam-
galiugdai

mikilj'uhtans

ma,
distahida
hairtins scinis.

51 He worhtc [ma\f::ne] on hys carme,
lie to-divlde da ofer-mddan on mode
hyra heortan.

r;2 Ga<lraiisida maliteigans af stolam,

52 lie iiwearp da rican of sctle, and

yah ushaiihida gahnaiwicUms.

da ead-modan up-ahof.

!

I. 37-52.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

37 For euery word schal not be inpos-

sible arieniptis God.

38 Forsoth Marie seide, Loo ! the hand
mayden of the Lord ; be it don to me
And the aungel depart-
aftir thi word.
ide fro hir.

39 Sothli Marie risinge vp in tho
dayes, wente with haste in to the hilly
placis, in to a citee of Judee.

40 And sche entride yn to the hows of

Zacharie, and grette Elizabeth.

41 And it was don, as Elizabeth herde
the salutacioun of Marie, the 5onge child
in hir wombe gladide. And Elizabeth
was fillid with the Hooly Gost,

TYNDALE, 1526.

273
37 For with God shall nothinge be

vnpossible.

38 Mary sayd, Beholde !

the honde
mayden off the Lorde ; be it vnto me
even as thou hast sayde. And the angell
departed from her.

39 Mary arose in tlioose dayes, and
went into the mountayns with hast, into
a cite off lewry.

40 And entred in to the housse off

Zacary, and saluted Elizabeth.

41 And it fortuned, as Elizabeth herde
the salutacion of Mary, the babe spronge
in her belly. And Elizabeth was filled
with the Holy Goost,

42 And criede with grete voyg, and
seide, Blessid he thou a mong Avymmen,
and blessid he the fruyt of thi wombe.

42 And cryed with a loude voyce, and
sayde. Blessed arte thou among wemen,
and blessed is the frute off thy wombe.

43 And wherof this thing to me, that

the modir of my Lord come to me 1

44 Loo ! forsothe as the vois of thi
salutacicun was maad in myn eeris, the
5onge child gladide with ioye in my
wombe.

45 And blessid thou ert, that hast
bileuyd, for tho thingis that beu seid to
thee fro the Lord, schulen be parfytli
don.
46 And Marie seide, My soule magny-
fieth the Lord,
47 And my spirit hath gladid in God,
myn heelthe.

48 For he hath biholden the mcke-
Loo ! forsoth
nesse of his hand maydc.
of this alle generaciouns schulen seic me
blessid.

49 For he that is my^ti hath don
grete thingis to mc, and his name is
hooly.

50 And his mercy is fro kynrcdis in to

kynredis, to men dredinge him.

51 lie made my3te in liis armc, he
Bcatcridc proude men with myndc of his
herte.

52 He puttidc doun my3ty men fro

scctc, and cnhaunside mcke.

43 And whens hapeneth this to me,
that the mother off my Lorde shulde
come to me ?

44 Loo! as sone as the voyce of thy
salutacion sownded in myne eares, the
babe lepte in my belly for ioye.

45 And blessed arte thou, that belev-
edst, for thoose thinges shalbe performed,
which were tolde the from the Lorde.

46 And Mary sayde. My soule magni-
ficth the Lorde,
47 And my sprete reioyseth in God,
my savioure.

48 For he hath loked on the povre
Beholde
degre off his honde mayden.
nowe from hens forth shall all genera-
cions call me blessed.

49 For he that is myghty hath done
to me greate thinges, and blessed ys his
name.

50 And hys mercy is always on tlicm
that fearc him, thorow outc all genera-
cions.

51 He hath shewed strcngthe with his
arme, he hath scattered them that arc
proude in the ymaginacion of
their
hertes.

52 He liath putt dounc the myghty
from their scatcR, and hath exalted them
of lowe degre.

T

1

274

GOTHIC- 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Li ke

53 Gretlagans gaso|)i(la ]>\u]>c, yah ga-

Lignaudaus "insandida lausans.

53 Hingriende he mid godum gefylde,
and ofcr-mode idele forlet.

54 Hleibida Isracla, J>iumagu seinara-

ma, gamunands armahairteins ;

55 Swaswe rodida du attara unsaraim,

Abraharaa yah fraiwa is, und aiw.

56 Gasto^ |>aii Mariam mij> izai swc
mcno))S ))rins, yah gawandida sik du
garda seinamma.

57 i)j Aileisabai}) usfuUnoda mel du

bairau, yah gabar suiiu.

54 He afeng Israhel, hys cnilit, and

genuinde hys mild-lieortnesse ;

55 Swa he sj)raic to urum fsederum,
Abrahame and hys saede, on a woruld.^

56 S6))lice Maria wunede mid hyre
swylce |)iy m6n})a.s, and gewende dj. to
hyre huse.

57 Da wa?s gefylled Elizabethe cen-
ning-tid, and heo sunu cende.

58 Yah hausidcdun bisitands yah ga-
izos, untc gainikilida Frauya
yah mi])fag-

nijjyos
armahairtein seina bi izai
inodedun izai.

;

59 Yah war]), 'in daga ahtudin, qemun
bimaitau |)ata barn ; yah haihaitun ina,
afar namin attins is, Zakarian.

58 And hyre nehcheburas and h}Te
cuctan daet gehyrdon, dxt Drihten hys
mild-heortnesse mid hyre msersode; and
hig mid hyre blissodon.
59 Da, on dam ehteojian daegc, hig
comon daet cild ymb-snidan ; and nem-
don hine, hys faeder naman, Zachariam.

60 Yah andliafyandei so ai])ei is qa|j,

60 Da andswarode his raodor, Nese

Ne, ak haitaidau lohannes.

6

Yah qe|)un du izai, patei ni ainshun
ist in kunya Jjcinamma, saci haitaidau
Jjamma namin.

62 Gabandwidedun j^an attin is, ])ata

whaiwa wildedi haitan ina.

sojjes, ac he by|> lohannes genemned,

61 Da cw?edon hig to hyre, Nis nan
mseg))e, dyson naman ge-

on dinre
nemned.

62 Da bicnodon hi to hys fa?der, hw8et

he wolde hine genemncdne beon.

63 l]j
melida,

is sokyands spilda, nam gah-
ist namo
qijjands,

Jolianncs

is.

Yali sildaleikidedun allai.

64 Usluknoda \>an mun|)S is suns, yah

tuggo is, yah rodida, ])iu])yands Gu]).

65 Yah war)) ana allaim agis |>aim
bisitandani ina, yali in allai bairgahein
ludaias mcrida wcsun alia J)o waurda.

6^ Da Avrat he, gebedenum wex-brede,
Da wundrodon

lohannes is hys nama.
hig ealle.

64 Da wearj) sona hys mu}^, and hys
tunge ge-openod, and he sprivc, Drihten
bletsiendc.

65 Da wear)) ege geword en ofer ealle
hyi-a nehcheburas, and ofer ealle ludca
das word gewid-
miint-land
mirrsode.

waeron

66 Yah galagidcdun allai ))ai liansyand-
seinannna, (ji|)andans,
Yah

ans in
Wlia skuli ))ata barn wair|uui 1
J)an hanihis Frauyins was mi^ ininia.

liairtin

67 Yah Zakaritis,

atta is, gafulliioda
Alnnins Wcihis, yah praufctida, yah
qa},,

68 piujjcigs Frauya Gu|> Israelis, untc
uslaus^in

gawaurlita

gawcisoda,
yah
managein scinai.

69 Yah urniisida haurn nasoiiiais unsis

66 And ealle da de hit gehyrdon on
heora
cwicilon,
"SVeiist dii, hwa^t by[) des cnapal Witod-
lice Drihtencs hand wa's mid him.

setton, and

heortan

67 And Zacharias, his fa'der, wa\s mid
Hiilegum Giiste gefylled, and he witeg-
ode, and cwa?)>,

68 Gebletsod si Drihten L«irahela Cod,
fordam de he geneosode, and his folccs
tilysednesse dyde.

69 And he us Ii.tIc horn ar.vrde on

in garda Dawcidis, })iumagaus seinis.

Dauides hiise, hys cnihtes.

;

I. 53-69.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
53 He hath fillid hungry men with
goode thingis, and he hath left ryche
men voyde.

54 He, hauynge mynde of his mercy,

took vp Israel, his child 3

55 As he hath spoken to oure fadris, to
Abraham and to his seed, in to worldis.
56 Forsoth Marye dwellide with hir as
three monethis, and tm-nyde a^en in to
hir hous.

57 Sothly the tyme of beringe child
was fillid to Elizabeth, and sche childide
a sone.

58 And the nei^eboris and cosyns of
hir herden, for the Lord hadde magny-
fied his mercy vnih hir ; and thei thank-
iden him.

59 And it was don, in the ei3tethe day,
thei camen for to circumside the child
and thei clepiden him Sacharie, by name
of his fadir.

60 And his modir answeringe seide,

Nay, but he schal be clepid John.

61 And thei seiden to hir, For no man
is in thi kyn, that is clepid bi this
name.

62 Sothli thei maden a syngne to his
fadir, whom he wolde him for to be
clepid.

6^ And he axinge a poyntel, wroot,
seyinge, John is his name. And alle
men wondriden.

64 Forsoth his mouth was openyd
anon, and his tunge, and he spak, bless-
inge God.

65 And drede was maad on alle her
nei3eboris, and thes wordis weren pup-
plischid on alle the hilly placis of Judee.

66 And alio men that herden puttedyn
ill her herte, seyinge. Who, ges.sist thou,
this child schal be 1 And sothli the
hond of the Lord was witli him.

67 And Zacharie, liis fadir, was fillid
with the Hooli Goat, and prophcsiede,
seyinge,

68 lilessid he the Lord God of Israel,
for lie liath visitid, and maad rcdcmp-
cioun of his peplc.

69 And he Imth rcrid to vs an liorn of

hclthe in the hous of Dauith, his child.

TYNDALE, 1526.

275
53 He hath filled the hongry with
goode thinges, and hath sent awaye the
ryche empty.

54 He hath remembred mercy, and

hath holpen his servaunt, Israhel;

55 Even as he promised to oure fathers,

Abraham and to his seede, for ever.

56 And Mary aboode with her iij.
monethes, and retourned home agayne.

57 Elizabethes tyme was come that
she shulde be delyvered, and she brought
forth a Sonne.

58 And her neghboures and her cosins
herde tell, howe the Lorde had magni-
fied hys mercy vppon her ; and they
reioysed with her.

59 And hit fortuned, the eyght daye,
they cam to circumcise the childe ; and
called his name Zacari, after the name
of his father.

60 And his mother answered and sayd,

Not soo, but he shalbe called Jhon.

61 And they sayd vnto her. There ys
none of thy kynne, that is named with
thys name.

6 2 And they made signes to hys father,

howe he wolde have hym called.

63 And he axed for wrytynge tables,
and ^v^•oote, saying, Hys name is Jhon.
And they mervelled all.

64 And hys moughtwas opened imme-
diatly, and hys tonge, and he spake,
lawdynge God. .

65 And feare cam on all them that
dwelt nye, and all these sayinges were
noised abroade throughoutt all the hylly
countre of Jewry.

66 And all they that herde them layde
them vppe in their hertes, saying, What
maner chylde shall thys be ? And the
honde of God was with i)yni.

67 And his father, Zachcrias, was fylled
with the Holy Goost, and prophisyed,
sayinge,

68 lilcsscd 1)6 the Lorde God of Israhol,
for he hath visited, and rcdemed his
people.

69 And liath rcyscd vppe the horno
oft' health vnto vs in the housse of his
servuuut, David.

T 2

;

270

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. U'ke

70 Swaswe ro(li<la |>airh iiniii)> woili-
aizc, jjize Irani anastodciiiai aiwis, prau-

fcte scinaize.

7 I Oiban nascin us fiyandam unsaraim,
pizc hataudane

yah us liaiidau allaize
unsis.

72 Tauyan armahairtij^a bi attam un-
earaini, yah gaiiiuiian triggwos weihaizos
seinaizos.

73 Aijiis j-anei swor wi|)ra Abraham,

attan unsaraua, ci gebi unsis.

70 Swji he sprrec \>u\\\ hys luilegra
witegena mu|), da tie of worldes fryni[)e
spraecon.

7 I And he Tdysde us of ui-um feondum,
and of ealra da^ra handa de us hatcdon.

72 Mild-licortnesse to wyrcanne mid
urum faiderum, and geraunan his haleg-
an eydnesse.

73 Hyne us to syllanne done a)) de he

urum fa3der, Abrahamc, swor.

74 Unagein us handau fiyande un-

saraize galausidaim, skalkiuon imma,

74 Da?t we butan ego of ure feonda

handa alysede, him J)eowian,

75 In sunyai yah garaihtein in and-

wair|)ya is allans dagans unsarans.

75 On halignesse beforan him eallura
lirum dagum.

76 Yah |)U, barnilo, praufetus Hauh-
fauragaggis auk faura
istins haitaza ;
andwairjjya Frauyins, nianwyan wigans
imnia.
77 Du giban kun})i naseinais managein
is, in afleta frawaurhte ize ;

78

pairh

irtfcinandcin

armahairtcin
Gu|)S unsaris, in })aninici gaweiso}) un-
sara urruns us hauhijjai.

79 Gabairhtyan jjaim in riqiza, yah
Bkadau dau|>us sitandam; du garaihtyan
fotuns unsarans in wig gawairjjyis.

80 1}) |)ata barn wohs, yah swinj^noda
ahniin, yah was ana aujjidom uud dag
ustaikneinais seinaizos du Israela.

Chap. II.

i War)) |)an Yn dagans
yainans, urraun gagrofts Irani Kaisara
Agustau, gamelyan alhiua midyungard.

2 Soh |)an gilstrameleins fnimista war})
at wisandin kindina Swriais, raginondin
Saurini Kwivinaiau,
iddyedun

niclidai

allai,

3 Yali

ci

76 And du, cnapa, byst daes Hchstan
gsest beforan

witega genemned ;
Drihtnes ansyne, his wegas gearwian.

dii

77 To syllanne his folce hys hscle gc-
wit, on hyra synna forgyfenesse

78 purh innodas ures Godes mild-
heortnesse, on dam he us geneosode of
east-daele up-springende.
79 Onlihtan dam de on |)ystrum, and
on dea))cs sceade sitta|> ; ure fet to ge-
reccanne on sybbe weg.

80 Sojjlice se cnapa weox, and wres on
gaste gestrangod, and wa's on wcstcnum
od done dteg hys setiweduessum on
Israhcl.

CiiAP. IT. ''i S6|)lice on dam dacjum,
W£es gcwordcn gcbod frani dani Casore
Augusto, (Xxt call ymbe-hw}Tft waere
tomearcod.

2 Dcos tomcarcodncs wa3S sercst gc-
wordcn fram dam deman Syrige, Ci-
rino.
3 And calle hig codon, .... and

wcseina, wliaryizuh 111 seinai baurg.

syndric ferdon on hyra ccastre.

4 UiTann ))an yah jfoscf us Gah^ilaia,
us baurg Nazarai|), in luihiian, in baurg
Dawcidis, sei haitada Bc|)hduuni, du)>e

4 Da fcrde loscp fram Galilea, of dnere
ccastre Nazareth, on ludeiscc, ccastre
is genemned Bcthlcem,
Dauidcs, seo

;

1

;

I. 70.-IL 4.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

277

70 As he spak by the mouthe of hooly

prophetis, that ben fro the world.

71 Helthe fro oure enemyes, and fro

the hond of alle men that hatiden vs.

72 To do mercy with oure fadris, and

to haue mynde of his hooly testament.

73 The 00th that he swor to Abraham,

oure fadir, to 3yue him silf to vs.

74 That we withoute drede deliuerid
fro the hond of oure enemyes, serue to
him,

75 In hoolynesse and ri5tfulnesse bifore

him in alle oure daycs.

76 And thou, child, schalt be clepid
the prophete of the Hi^este ; for thou
schalt go bifore the face of the Lord, to
make redy his weyes.
77 For to 5yue the science of helthe
to his peple, in to remiscioun of her
synnes

78 Bi the entraylis of mercy of oure
God, in whiche he spryngynge vp fro an
hi3 hath visytid vs.

79 For to 3yue li3t to hem that sitten
in derknessis, and in schadewe of deth ;
for to dresse oure feet in to the wey of
pees.

80 Sothli the child waxidc, and was
comfortid in spirit, and was in desert til
to the day of his schewinge to Israel.

70 Even as he promised by the moughth
of his holy prophetes, which were sens
the worlde began.

7

That we shulde be saved from oure
enimys, and from the hondis of all that
hate vs.

72 To shewe mercy towardes
fathers, and to remember hys
promes.

oure
holy

73 That is to saye the oothe which he
sware to oure father, Abraham, for to
geve vs.

7 4 That we delivered oute of the hondes
of oure enemis, myght serve hym with
oute feare,

75 All the dayes of oure lyfe in suche
holynes and ryghtewesnes that are ac-
cept before him.

76 And thou, chylde, shalt be called
the prophet off the Hyest ;
for thou
shalt goo before the face off the Lorde,
to prepare his wayes.
. 77 And to geve knowlege off health
vnto hys people, for the remission of
sinnes

78 Through the tender mercy off oure
Lorde, wher with hath visited vs the
daye springe from an hye.

79 To geve light to them that sate in
darcknes, and in shadowe of deth; and
to gyde oure fete into the waye of
peace.

chylde

80 And the

encreased, and
wexed stronge in sprete, and was in
wildernes tyll the daye cam when he
shulde shewe hymsilfe vnto the Is-
rahelites.

Chap. II.

1 Forsothe it was don in
tho dayes, a maundement went out fro
Ce-sar August,^ that al the world schuldc
be discryued.

2 This firstc discryuyng was maad of

Cyryne, iustice of Ciryc.

Chap. II.

i Hit folowed in thoose
dayes, that there went oute a commaund-
mcnt from Auguste the Emperour, that
all the woorlde shulde be valued.

2 This taxynge was fyrst executed when

Syrenus was Icftcnaunt in Siria.

3 And ullc men wcntcn, that thci
schuhlc make profescioun,^ ech by him
self in to his cite.

4 Sothly and Joscp Hti3cdc vp fro Gali-
lee, of the cite of Nazareth, in to Ju(k;,
in to a cite of Dauitli, tliat
is clepid

3 And every man went in to his awnc

shyre toune, there to be taxed.

4 And Joseph also ascended fiom Ga-
lil(!, oute of u cite called Nazurctli, vnto
lewry, into a cite of David, wliich is

2

2

;

278

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

ei was us garda fudrcinais Dawcidis,

5 Anamelyan mij> ^farim, sei 'in fragift-

im was Ymma qeins wisaiidcin inkilj?on.

6 War)) |)an. iiiij^jnanoi |)0 wesun yainar,

usfulluodedun dagos, du bairau "izai.

7 Yah gahar snnu scinana jjana friim-
abaur, yah. biwand ina, yah gahigi(Ui ina
in uzetin, unte ni was im rumis in
Btada jjamma.

fordam do he waes of Dauides huse and
hirede,

5 DjBt he ferde mid Marian, cle him

beweddod waes and waes ge-eacnod.

6 S6))lice waes geworden, da hi dar
wseron, hire dagas wacron gefylledc, daet
heo cende.

7 And hco ccnde li}Te frum-connedan
sunn, and hine mid eild-cladum l^ewand,
and hine on binne alede, fordam de hig
naefdon rum on cumena huse.

8 Yah hairdyos wesun in |>amma sam-
in landa, j^airhwakandans yah witand-
ans wahtwom uahts ufaro hairdai seinai.

8 And hyrdas waeron on dam ylcan
rice, wacicnde and niht-waeccan heald-
ende ofer hcora heorda.

9 t]> aggilus Frauyins anaqam ins, yah
"wulj^us Frauyins ])iskain ins ; yah oht-
edun acjisa mikilamma.

9 Da stod Drihtnes engel wid big,
and Godcs beorhtnes him ymbe-sccan
and hi him mycelum ege adredon.

10 Yah qa}> du im sa aggilus, Ni
spillo izwis faheid

ogeij) ;
mikila, sei wairjjij) allai managcin.

untc sai !

I T patci gabaurans ist izwis himma
daga nasyands, saei ist Christus Frauya,
in baurg Dawcidis.

1

Yah |)ata iz\\'is taikus ; bigitid barn

biwundan, yah gahigid in uzetin.

13 Yah anaks war)) mij? jjamnia agg-
ihxu managci liaryis himinakundis, liaz-
yandano Gu|>, yah qijjandanc,

14 Wul))us in liauhistyam Guj^a, yah
ana airj^ai gawairj)i in niannani godis
wilyins.

15 Yali war)), bi))C gahjnin fairra im
in hiniin ))ai aggilyus, yali ))ai mans )'ai
liairdyos qe))un du sis misso, pairligagg-
aima yu uiid l^)e]ilahaim, yali saiwhaima
waurd ))ata waur])ano, |>atei Frauya ga-
kannida unsis.

10 And se engel him to cwapj), Nelle ge
cow adrsedan ; s6))lice mi ! ic cow bodie
mycelne gefean, se bi]) eallum folce.

11 Fordam to-da^g eow ys

haelend
acenned, se is Drihten Crist, on Dauides
ceastrc.

1

And dis taccn cow by)) ; ge ge-
meta)) an cild hra^glum bewiinden, and
on binne aled.

13 And da waes fseringa geworden mid
dam engle mycclnes hcofonlices werydes,
God herigendra, and dus cwedendra,

14 Gode sy wuldor on hcahncsse, and

on cor))an sybb maunum godcs wiUan.

15 And hit waes geworden, da da cn-
glas to heofone ferdon, da hynlas him
betwynan spraecon, and cwaedon, Uton
to Bethlccm, and gcseon da't
faran
word de geworden is, da^t Drihten us
aetywde.

16 Yah qcmun sniumyandans, yah bi-
getun Afarian yah losef, yah J)ata barn
ligando in uzetin.

17 (Jasaiwliandans ))an, gakannidedun
bi ))ata waurd ))atei rodij) was du im
bi ))ata barn.

18 Yah allai

))ai gahausyandans sil-
daleikidedun, bi ))o rodidona fram jjaim
hairdyam du im.

16 And hitr efstcnde comon, and jrc-
metton Marijm and losep, and d;ot cild
on binne lilcd.

17 Da hi da't gcsawon, da oncncowon
hig be dam worde de him gcs;vd w:cs
be dam cilde.

18 And eallc da de gchyrdon wund-
be dam de him da hyrdas

rcdon,
ssedon.

6
2
1

2
1

TI. 5-i8.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

279

Bedleera, for that he was of the hous
and meyne of Dauith,

5 That he schulde knowleche with

Marie, with child spousid wyf to him.

6 Sothli it was don, whanne thei weren
there, the dayes weren fulfillid, that she
schulde here child.

7 And sche childide her firste born
sone, and wlappide him in clothis, and
puttide him in a cracche, for ther was
not place to hym in the comyn stable.

8 And schepherdis weren in the same
cuntre, wakinge and kepinge the watchis
of the ny3t on her flok.

9 And loo ! the aungel of the Lord
stood by sydis hem, and the clerenesse
of God schynede aboute hem j and thei
dredden with greet drede.

10 And the aungel seide to hem, Nyle
5e drede ; lo ! sothli I euangelise to 50U
a grete ioye, that schal be to al peple.

1

For a sauyour is borun to day to
vs, that is Crist the Lord, in the cite of
Dauith.

1

And this a tokene to 50U ; ^e schulen
fynde a ^ong child wlappid in clothis,
and put in a cracche.

13 And sudenly ther is maad with
the aungel a multitude of heuenly kny3t-
hod, heriynge God, and seyinge,

14 Glorie be in the hi3este thingis to
God, and in erthe pees be to men of
good wille.

15 And it was don, that whanne the
aungelis passiden a wey fro hem in to
heucne, the schepherdis spaken to gidere,
sciynge, Passe we ouer til to Bedleem,
and se we this word that is maad, the
whiche the Lorde maad, and schewid
to vs.

1

And thei hy3inge camen, and found-
en Marie and Joseph, and a jong child
put in a cracche.

17 Sotlili thei scingc, kncwcn of the
word that was seid to hem of this child.

18 And alle men that haddcn herd
wondridcn, and of thca thingis that
weren seide to hem of the schepherdis.

called Bethleem, because he was of the
housse and linage of David,

5 To be taxed with Mary, his wedded

wife which was with childe.

6 And it fortuned, whill they there
were, her tyme was come, that she shulde
be delyvered.

7 And she brought forth her fyrst be-
gotten Sonne, and wrapped hym in swad-
cloothes, and layed hym in a
lynge
manger, be cause there was no roume
for them with in in the hostrey.

8 And there were in the same region
shepherdes, abydinge in the felde and
watching their flock e by nyght.

9 And loo ! the angell of the Lorde
stode harde by them, and the brightnes
of the Lorde shone rounde aboute them ;
and they were soore afrayed.

10 And the angell sayd vnto them. Be
not afrayed ; beholde ! I brynge you
tydinges off greate ioye, that shall come
to all the people.

1

For vnto you is borne this daye in
the cite of David, a saveoure, which is
Christ the Lorde.

1

And take this for a signe ; ye shall
fynde the childe swadled, and layed in a
manger.

13 And streight waye there was with
the angell a multitude of hevenly sow-
diers, laudynge God, and sayinge,

14 Glory to God an hye, and peace on

the erth, and vnto men reioysynge.

15 And itt fortuned, as sone as the
angels were gone awaye in to heven,
the shepherdes sayd won to another, Let
vs goo even vnto Bethleem, and se this
thynge thatt is hapened, which the Lorde
hath shewed vnto vs.

16 And they cam with haste, and
founde Mary and Joseph, and the babe
layde in a manger.

17 Wlicn they had scnc it, they pub-
lisslicd al)rodc the saynge which was
toldc thcin off that chyldc.

18 And all that hcnlc itt wondrcd, atfc
thoose thyngcs which were toldc them
off the shepherdes.

;

280

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

19 Ij) Maria alia j:^afastaida |)0 waunla,

19 Maria geheold ealle das word, on

J)agkyan(lei in hairtin seinamma.

byre heortan smeagende.

20 Yah gawaiiclideduii sik })ai liairdyos,
mikilyandans yah hazyaiidaiis Guj) in
})izcci gahausidedun yah
ga-
allaize
sewjiun, swaswc rodij> was du im.

21 Yah \n\)C usfulnodcdun dagos ahtau,
du biniaitan iiia, yah haitan was nanio
is lesus, jjata qijjano fram aggilau, faur-
j)izei ganumans wesi in wamba.

22 Yah bi))e iisfulnodedun dagos hrain-
einais ize, bi witoda Mosezis, brahtcdun
ina in lairusalcm, atsatyan faura Frau-

23 Swaswe gamelid ist

witoda
Frauyins, patci whazuh gumakundaize
uslukands qipiu^ weihs Frauyins haitada

in

24 Yah ei gcbeina fram imma hunsl,
swaswc qi[)au ist in witoda Frauyins,
Gaynk hraiwadubono, aijjjjau twos yugg-
ons ahakc.

25 paruh was manna in lairusalem,
J>izei nanio Swmaion ; yah sa manna
was garaihts yah gudafaurhts, beidands
la|)onais Israelis ; yah Ahma Weihs was
ana imma.

26 Yah was imma gataihan fram Ah-
min )?amma Weihin, ni saiwhau daujju,
faurjjize sewhi Christu Frauyins.

27 Yah qam in ahmin in Jnzai alh.
Yah mi}?})auei innattanhun bcrusyos jjata
barn losu, ci tawidcdeina bi biuhtya
witodis bi ina,

20 Da gewendon ham da hjTdas, God
wuldrigendc and heriendc on eallum
dam de hi gehyrdon and gesawon, swa
to him gecweden waes.^

21 ^fter dam de ehta

dagas ge-
fyllede wseron, da^t da3t cild emb-snyden
W3ere, his nama waes Haelcnd, se Wics
fram engle genemned, str he on iunode
ge-eacnod wsere.

22 And aefter dam de hyre clscnsungc
dagas gefyllede wacron, jeftcr Moyses
sc, hi laiddon hine on Hierusalcm, dtvt
hi hine Gode gesetton,

23 Swa swa on Drihtnes se iiwritcn is,
Dajt aelc wsepned gecynd-lim ontynendc,
byjj Drihtne halig genemned ;

24 And daet hig offnmgc sealdon,
nefter dam de Drihtnes ae gecweden is,
Twa turtlan, odde twegen culfi-an brid-
das.

25 And da waes an man on Hieru-
salcm, da^s nama wass Simeon ; and dcs
man WcTS rihtwis,
and od Is-
rahela frofor ge-anbidiende ; and Halig
Giist him on wa?s.

.

.

.

26 And he andsware fram dam Haleg-
an Giiste onfeng, daet he dca}> ne ge-
sawe, biiton he aer Drihten Crist ge-
sawe.

27 And on gaste lie on dat tcmpcl
And da his magas hCddon done
com.
Ha^lend, da}t hig for him after dare
ae gewunan dydon,

28 Yah is andnam ina ana armins

28 He onfeng hine mid hys handum,

Bcinans, yah })iu)nda Guj)a, yah (pil',

29 Nu fralcitais skalk |)einana frau-
yinond, Frauya, bi waurda ])cinamma in
gawair|)ya ;

30 pandc sewhun augona mcina nascin

and God bletsode, and cwa^j:,

29 Drihten, nu dii laetst dinne j'cow

a^fter dinum worde on sibbe ;

30 Fordam mine eagan gesawon dine

})cina,

haele,

31 j^oci mnnwidcs in andwaiijiya al-

31 Da dii ge-carwodest bcforan ansync

laizo managcino ;

eallia folca ;

32 Liuha|) du andhulcinai })iudom, yah

32 Leol\t to |)eoda awrigenesse, and to

wul)'U managcin ))oinai Israela.

33 Yah was loscf yali ai|)oi is silda-
leikyandonaana )>aim, |)oci rodida wcsun
bi iua.

dines folces wuldrc Israhel.^

33 Da wa^s his fabler and his mod or
wundriende be dam, de be him gesaede
wacron.

9

;

9
1

;

n. 19-33] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

281

Forsoth Marie kepte alle tlies wordis,

1

beringe to gidere in hir herte.

20 And the schepherdis turneden a5en,
glorifiynge and heriynge God in alle
thingis that thei hadden herd and seyn,
as it is seyd to hem.

21 And aftir that ei^te dayes weren
endid, that the child schulde be circum-
sidid, his name was clepid Jhesus, which
was clepid of the aungel, bifore he was
conseyued in wombe.

2 2 And aftir that the -dayes of purga-
cioun of Marie weren fulfild, vp Moyses
lawe, thei token him in to Jerusalem,
schulden offre him to the
that thei
Lord,

23 As it is writun in the lawe of the
Lord, For ech male kynde openynge
the wombe to go out, schal be clepid
hooly to the Lord

24 And that thei schulen 5yue an off-
rynge, vp that it is seid in the lawe of
the Lord, A peyre of turtris, or twey
culuere briddis.

25 And lo ! a man was in Jerusalem,
to whom the name Symeon ; and this
man vms iust and dredful, abidinge the
comfort of Israel ; and the Hooly Gost
was in him.

26 And he hadde taken answere of the
Hooly Gost, that he schal not se deeth,
no but he sai3 first the Crist of the
Lord.

And whenne his

27 And he cam in spirit in to the
fadir and
temple.
iiiodir Icdden in the child Jhesu, that
thei schulden do vp the custom of lawe
for him,

28 And he took him in to his armes,

and he blcssidc God, and scide,

29 Lord, now thou Iceuyst thi scruaunt

vp thi word in pees j

30 For rayn y^en ban seyn thin hclthc,

31 The which thou liast maad rcdy

bifore the face of alle pcplis ;

32 Li3t to tlic schewing of hcthcnc,

and glorie of tlii pcple of I.srael.

33 And his fadir and his inodir wcrcn
wondringe on then tliingis, that wcrcn
seid of him.

But Mary kept all thoose sayinges,

1

and pondered them in hyr liert.

20 And the

shepherdes retourned,
praysynge and laudynge God ffor all
that they had herde and sene, evyn as
itt was told vnto them.

2

And when the eyght daye was come,
thatt the chylde shuld be circumcised,
his name was called Jesus, which was
named off the angell, before he was con-
ceaved in his mothers wombe.

22 And when the tyme of their purifi-
cacion, after the lawe of Moyses, was
come, they brought hym to Hierusalem,
to present hym to the Lorde,

23 As yt is written in the lawe off the
Lorde, Every man chylde
that fyrst
openeth the matrix, shalbe called holy
to the Lorde ;

24 And to offer, as yt ys sayde in the
lawe of the Lorde, A payre off turtle
doveS; or ij. yonge pigions.

25 And beholde! there was a man in
Hierusalem, whose name was Simeon
and the same man was iuste and feared
God, and longed for the consolacion off
Israhel ; and the HolyGoost was in hym.
26 And an answer was geven hym of
the Holy Goost, that he shulde not se
dcethe, before he had sene the Lordes
Christ.

27 And he cam by inspiracion in to
And as the father and
the temple.
mother broght in the chylde Jesus, to
do for hym after the customc of the
lawe,

28 Then toke he hym vppe in his
armes, .... and saydc,
29 Lorde, nowe lettest tliou thy scr-
vaunt dcparte in peace aecordingc to
thy promes ;

30 For myne eyes have sene the savcour

sent from the,

31 Which thou hast prepared before

tlie face of all people ;
32 A liglit to lighten the gcntyls, and
tlie glory olV thy ]>coi)le Tsnihel.
33 And his fulhcr and mother mcrvel-
Icd att thoose thingcs, which were spoken
off hym.

282

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995. [St. Luke

34 Yah |)iii))i(la ina S^vTllaion, ynh qajj
du Mariin, aij'cin 'is, 8ai !
sa li^n}) du
drusa yah usstassai managaize m Is-
racla, yah du taiknai andsakauai.

35 Yah Jmn

saiwala
})airhi,'ai,';rij, hairus, ei andhulyaiudau us
managaini hairtam mitoneis.

8il])ons

]>eina

36 Yali was Anna praufcteis, dauhtar
Fanuelis, us kunya Aseris.
Soh fram-
aUh-a dage managaizc, libandei mij) abin
ycra sibun fram maga]jcin seinai.

37 Soh J)an widuwo yere alitautchund
yah fidwor ; soh ni afiddya fairra alh,
fastubnyam yah bidom blotande Frau-
yan nahtam yah dagam.

38 Soh j>izai wheilai atstandandei, and-
haihait Frauyin, yah rodida bi ina in
aHaim |)aim usbeidandam la)jon lairu-
eaulwmos.
39 Yah bi]?e ustauhun allata, bi witoda
"in Ga-

Frauyins, gawandidedun sik
leilaian, in baurg scina Nazaraij).

34 And da bletsode hig Simoon, and
cwa?)) to Marian, his meder, Loca mi !
des is on hr}Te and on seryst asett
mancgra on Isralicl, and on tacen, dam
de wid-cweden byj).

35 And his sweord dine sawlc Inn-h-
dixit gejjohtas syn awrigcne of

fvei\>,

mancgum hcortum.

36 And Anna waes witegcstrc, Fan-
Dcos
ueles dohtor, of Asseres msegj^e.
wunode mrenigne daeg, and heo lyfode
mid hyre were scofen gear of hyrc
faemnhade.

37 And heo w.ts wuduwe od feower
seo of dam
and hund-eahtatig geara ;
temple ne gewat, dceges and nihtes
l^eowigende on fsestenum and on hal-
sungum.

38 And deos daere tide becumende,
Drihtne andette, and be him spr;vc
callum dam de gc-anbidedon Hierus-
alera alysednesse.
39 And da hi

ealle jnng gefyldon,
on

hi gehwurfon

a?fter Drihtncs
Galilcam, on hcora ceastre Nazareth.

ae,

40 I)) |)ata barn wohs, yah swin|>noda,
ahmius fulhiands yah handugeins ; yah
ansts Gu))S was ana irama.

40 S6})lice dnet cild weox, and wa?s
gestrangod, wisdomes full j and Godes
gyfu waes on him.

41 Yah wratodedun |>ai birusyoa is
yera whammeh in lairusalcm, at dul|)
paska.

42 Yah bl})c war)) t\yalil)wintrus, us-
gaggandam ^an ini in iairusaulwnia, bi
biuhtya dul|)ais,

43 Yah ustiuhandam ]ians dagans, mi))-
hfxne gawandidcchm sik aftra,
gasto})
Icsus sa magus in lairusalcm, yah ni
wisedun Toscf yah aijici is.

44 Ilugyandona in gasinj^yani ina wis-
an, qemun dagis wig, yah sokidedun ina
in ganijjyani yah in kunj^ani.

45 Yah ni l)igitandona 'ina, gawandi-
dedun sik in lairusalcm, sokyandona
ina.

46 Yah warji, afar dagans j^rins bigc-
tun ina in allh, sitaudan in niidyaim

41 And his magas ferdon »lce gearc
to Hierusalem, on easter-da?ges freols-
tide.

42 And da he vrxs twclf wintre, hy
foron to Hieinisalem, to dam easterlican
frcolse, opfter hyra gewunan,

43 And gefylledum dagum, dii hig
se Hjrlend on
agen-gchwurfon, behif
Hierusalem, and his magaadiiit nyston.

44 ^Vendon daet he on heora gefore
waere, da comon hig iincs dreges fa?r,
and hine sohton bctwcox his magas and
his ciidan.

45 Da hig hyne ne fiindon, hig ge-

wcndon to Hierusalem, hine secende.

46 Dji, a^fter |>nm dagum hig fiindon
hine on dam temple, sittcnde on mid-

11.34-46.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

283

34 And Symeon blesside hem, and
seide to Marie, his modir, Lo ! this is
put in to the fallinge and in to the rys-
inge a5en of many men in Israel, and
in to a tokene, to whom it schal be
a^einseid.

35 And a swerd schal passe thorw thin
owne soule, that thou3tis be schewid of
manye hertis.

gon

And sche hadde

36 And Anna was a prophetisse, the
dou^tir of Fanuel, of the lynage
of
Aser.
forth
in many dayes, and hadde lyued with
hir hosebonde seuen ^eer fro hir mayd-
enhed.
37 And this was a widowe til to foure
score 5eer and foure ; which departide
not fro the temple, seruynge ny5t and
day to fastingis and bisechingis.

38 And this in thilke our aboue com-
ynge, know^lechide to the Loid, and
spak of him to alle that abiden the re-
dempcioun of Israel.

39 And as thei hadden perfjrtli doon
alle thingis, by the lawe of the Lord,
thei turnyden a3en in to Galilee, in to
her citee Nazareth.

40 Sothli the child wax, and was coum-
fortid, ful of ^v}'sdom ; and the grace of
God was in him.

41 And his fadir and modir wenten by
alle ^eeris in to Jerusalem, in the so-
leinpne day of paske.

42 And whanne Jhesus was maad of
twelue ^eeris, hem sti3ynge vp in to Je-
rusalem, by custom of the feeste day,

43 And the dayes endid, whanne thei
turncden a3en, the child dweltc in Jeru-
salem, and his fadir and modir knewen
not.

44 Forsothe thei gessingc him to be in
the felowschipe, camen the wey of a day,
and 80U3tcn him a mong his cosyns and
knowcn.

45 And thei not fyndingc, wenten a3cn
in to Jerusalem, sckyngc him.

46 And it was don, aftir the thridde
day thei founden him in the temple,

34 And Simeon blessed them, and sayd
vnto Mary, his mother, Behold !
this
childe shalbe the fall and resurreccion
off many in Israhel, and a signe, which
shalbe spokyn agaynste.

35 And moreover the swearde shall
pearce the very hert off the, that the
of many hertes maye be
thoughtes
opened.

36 And there was Anna a prophetes,
the doughter of Phanuel, of tribe of
Aser. And she was off a greate age,
and had lived with an husbande .vij.
yere from her virginite.

37 And this wedowe was aboute .iiij.
scoore and .iiij. yere off age ; which
went never oute of the temple, but
served there with fastinge and prayer
nyght and daye.

38 And she cam forth that same houre,
and praysed God, and spake of hym to
all that loked for redempcion in Hieru-
salem.

39 And as sone as they had performed
all thinges, accordinge to the lawe off
the Lorde, they returned into Galile, into
their awne cite Nazareth.

40 And the childe grewe, and wexed
stronge in sprete, and was full off wys-
dom ; and the favour of God was with
hym.

41 And his father and mother went to
Hierusalem every yeare, att the feeste
of ester.

42 And when he was xij. yere olde,
they went vppe to Hierusalem, after the
custome of the feeste,

43 And when they had fulfilled the
dayes, as they returned home, the chylde
Jesus boode styll in Hierusalem, vnknow-
ynge to his father and mother.

44 For they supposed he had bene in
the company, they cam a days iorncy,
and sought hym amonge their kynsfolko
and acquayntaunce.
45 And founde hym not, they went
])ackc agayne to Hierusalem, and sought
hym.

46 And liit fortuned, that after .iij.
dayes they fouiidc hym in the temple,

;

284

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

laisaryam, yah hausyandan ira yah fraih-
naudau ins.

47 Usgeisnodcdun ))an allai j>ai haus-
yandans is, ana frodeiu yah andawaurd-
yani is.

48 Yah j^asaiwhandans 'ina siklaleik-
Yah (jajj du imnia so aij^ei is,
idedun.
Mafj^au, wlia gatawides uns swa]
Sai !
sa atta jjcins yah ik winnandona soki-
dcduni ))uk.

49 Yali qaj? du im, AMia )>atei soki-
dcduj) inik ] niu wisseduj?, ))atei in ])aim
attins meinis, skulda wisan ?

50 Yah iya ni fro|>un Jjamma waurda,

Jjatei rodida du im.

51 Yah iddya m\]> im, yah qam in
Nazarai|>, yah was ut'hausyands im. Yah
is gafastaida \>o waurda alia in
ai})ei
hairtin scinamma.

52 Yah lesus })aih frodein, yah wahs-

tau, yah austai, at Gujja yah mannam.

dan dam lareowum, hlystende and hi
ahsicnde.

47 Da wundrodon hig ealle de gc-
hyrdon, be his gleawscipe and hys and-
swarum.

48

Da cwa?|) his modor
to him, Sunu, hwi dydest du unc dus 1
din fedcr and ic sfirigende de sohton.

49 Da cwa?j) he to him, Hwai't is da?t
gyt me sohton ]
nyste gyt, dat me
gebyra}) to beonne, on dam ))ingum de
mines feeder synd ?

50 Da ne ougeaton hig da?t word, de

he to him spr^ec.

51 Da ferde he mid him, and com to
Nazareth, and wa?s him undcr-jicod.
And his m5dor geheold ealle das word,
on hyre heortan smeagende.

52 And se Hivlcnd |'eah on wisdome,
and on ylde, and mid gyfe, mid Gode
and mid mannum.

Chap. III.

i In ycra |>an fimfta-
tailmndin })iudinassaus Tcibairiaus, Kai-
saris,ragin()ndin Puntiau Pcilatau ludaia,
yah fidurraginya j)is Galcilaias, Herodeis,
Filippauzuh, [)an
fidurrag-
inya |)is Ituraias, yah Trakauncitidaus
landis, yah Lwsaniaus, Abeilcni fidur-
raginya,

bro})rs

is,

Chap. III.

i +S5))lice dam fiftco|mn
geare does Caseres anwealdcs, Tiberii,
begymendum dam Pontiscan
Pilate
Iudea-|?eode, feor})an dseles rica Galilee.
Herode, Filippo, his
feorjian
deelcs rica Iturie, and da?s rices Tra-
conitidis, and Lisania, Abiline feor))an
dacles rica,

breder,

2 At auhmistam gudyam Annin yah
Kayafin, war}) waurd Gujis at lohannen,
Zachariins sunau, in aujudai.

2 Under daera sacerda caldrum Anna
and Caifa, Godes word w.ts gcwordcn
ofer Zacharias sunu, on wcstene.

3 Yah qam and allans gauyans Taur-
danaus, mcryands daupcin iilrcigos du
fralcta frawaurlite.

4 Swaswe gamelid ist in bokom waurdc
Esac'iins, praufctaus, (ii})andins, Stibna
wo})yandins in au})idai, ^lanwcid wig
Frauyins, raihtos waurkci}> staigos is.

3 And he com into call Tordancs rice,
bodigende docd-bote fulluht and synna
forgyfenesse.

4 Swii hit awriten ys on Isaics bee,
diT?s witegan, Clyi)iendes stefu on west-
cne, Gegearwiaj) Drihtnes weg, doj) his
sidas rihte.

5 All dalci usfullyada, yah all fairgunyc
yah hlaine gahnaiwyada ; yah wair|M|)
j^ata wraifjo du raibtamma, yah usdrus-
tcis du wigam slailitaim

;

5 yE'lc dcnu bi|> gefyllcd, and a?lc
nuint and beorh by|) genydcrod ; and
j>weoru beoj) on gerihte, and ungerydu
on smcde wegits

;

II. 47 -ni. 5.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

285

sittinge in the myddil of doctours, heer-
inge hem and axinge hem.
47 Sothli alle men that herden him,
wondriden on the prudence and answeris
of him.
48 And thei seynge wondriden. And
his modir seide to him, Sone, what hast
thou don to vs thus 1 Lo ! thi fadir and
I sorwynge han sou3t thee.

49 And he seith to hem. What is it
that 3e sou^ten me ? wisten ^e not. for
in tho thingis that ben of my fadir, it
bihoueth me to be ?

50 And thei vndirstoden not the word,

which he spak to hem.

51 And he cam doun with hem, and
cam to Nazareth, and was suget to hem.
And his modir kepte to gidere alle thes
wordis, beringe to gidere in hir herte.

52 And Jhesu profitide in wysdom,
age, and grace, anemptis God and men.

sittinge in the middes of the doctours,
both hearynge them and posinge them.
47 And all that herde hym, mervelled
at his witt and answers.

48 And when they sawe hym they were
astonyed. And his mother sayde vnto
hym, Sone, why haste thou thus dealte
with vs ? Beholde ! thy father and I
have sorowed and sought the.
49 And he sayd vnto them, Howe is it
that ye sought me 1 wist ye not, that I
muste goo aboute my fathers busines ?

50 And they vnderstod nott the saynge,

that he spake to them.

51 And he went with them, and cam
to Nazareth, and was obedient to them.
His mother kept all these thynges in
her hert.

52 And Jesus increased in wisdom,
and age, and in favoure, with God and
man.

Chap. III.

i Forsothe in the fyf-
tenthe 3eer of the empyre of Tiberie,
emperour, Pilat of Pounce kepinge Judee,
sothli Eroude, prince of Galilee, Philip
forsoth, his brother, prince of Ituree,
and of the cuntre of Tracon, and Lisany,
prince of xVbilyn,

Chap. III.

i In the fiftenthe yeare
of the raigne off Tiberius, the emperoure,
Pontius Pilate beinge leftenaunt of Jewry,
and Herode beinge tetrarch of Galile,
and his brother Philip, tetrarch in Iturea,
and in the region of Traconitis, and Ly-
sanias the tetrarch of A byline,

2 Vndir the princis of prestis Annas
and Cayfas, the word of the Lord is
maad on John, the sone of Zacharie, in
desert.

3 A J he cam in to al the cuntre of
Jordan, prechinge baptym of penaunce
in to rcmyscioun of synnes.

4 As it is writun in the book of wordis
of Ysaye, the prophete, The voys of oon
criynge in desert. Make ^e redy the
wcye of the Lord, make 30 his pathis
ri3t.

5 Ech valey schal be fulfillid, and cch
mountayn and litil
hil schal be maad
I0U3 ; and schrcwidc thingis schulen l)c
in to drcssid thingis, and scharpe thingis
in to playne weyes ;

2 When Anna and Cayphas were the
hye prestes, the commaundment of God
was puplisshed vnto Jhon, the sonne off
Zacarias, in the wildernes.

3 And he cam into all the coostes
aboute Jordan, preachynge the baptim of
repentaunce for the remission of synnes.
4 As it is written in the bokc of the
sayinges of Esayas, the prophet, Avhicli
saeth, The voycc off a cryar in wylder-
ncs, Prepare the waye off the Lordc,
make hys [)atlics straight.

5 Every valley shalbe fylled, and every
mountayne and hyll shulbc broght lowe ;
and crocked thynges shalbe made strcight,
and the rought waycs shalbe made smoth

8
2
1

1

280

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

6 Yuh gasaiwlii)) all leikc nasein Gu|>s.

6 And aide flsesc gesih}> Godes haele.

7

Qa}j

))an du |)aiin

atgaf^gandcim
manageim, daiipyan fram sis, Kuui nad-
re, wlms gataiknida izwis jjliuhau faura
))amma anawair);iu hatiza ]

8 Waurkyai}> nu akran wair|)ata id-
rcigos, yah ni duginiiaij? qi|mn "in 'izwis,
Attan aiguin Abraham ;
([\\>i\ auk izwis,
patei mag Gu}) us stainam j>aim urrais-
yan barna Abrahama.

9 A|)j)an yu so aqizi at waurtim bagme
\\gi\> ; all nu bagme unbairaiidane akran
god, usmaitada, yah 'in fon galagyada.

7 S6))lice he cwiv]> to dam menegum,
tte ferdon, daet In waeron gefullode frani
him, Eala ge naiddrena cynn, hwa a-t-
ywde eow diet ge fleon fram dam to-
weardan yiTe 1

8 Doj) geornlTce weordlice dsed-bote
waestmas, and ne ongynne ge ewedan,
AVe habbaj) us to fa*der Abraham ; ic
secge eow, du?t God is swa mihtig da-t
he mseg of dysum stanum Abrahames
beam aweccan.

9 Nu is SCO a3x aset to daes treowcs
wyrtruman ; witodlice aelc treow de ne
bryngj) godne Vajstm, bi)) forcorfen, and
on fyr aworpen.

10 Yah frchun i'na manageins, qi|>-

10 Da ahsodon hyne da mencgii, and

andans, An wha tauyaima 1

1

Andhafyands |>an qa]?, Sa habands
twos paidos, gibai jiamma unhabaudiu ;
yah saei habai matins, samaleiko tauyai.

cwaedon, Hwaet do we 1

1

Da cwa?]) he to him, Se de hpef))
twa tunecan, sylle dam de na-f)) ; and
dam gelice do, se de mettas h£ef[).

1

qt'j)un du
yaima ?

Qemun jjan motaryos daupyan ; yah
imma, Laisari, wha tau-
13 paruh qaj) du i'm, M waiht, ufar

12 Da comon da manfullan diet hig
a|)wegenc waeron ; and cwa?don to him,
Lareow, hwaet do we ?

13 Da cwsej) he, Ne d5 ge naht marc,

))atei garaid siyai izwis, lausyaij).

donne dset eow geset is.

14 Frehun |:an 'ina yah j^ai militond-
qijjandans, Yah weis wha tau-
ans,
Yali qaj) du im, Ni mannanhun
yaima ?
liolo}), ni mannanhun anamahtyajd, yah
"vvaldail) annom 'izwaraim.

15 At wcnyandt'in |^an allai managcin,
yah |mgkyandamallaiminhairtam scinaim
bi lohanncin, niu aufto sa wcsi Christus,
16 Andhof jmn lohannos, allaim (p[>-

ands, Ik allis "izwis watin dau|)ya ;
gaggi|) swin|)Oza mis, |)izei
wair)»s andbindan skandaraip skohis 'is
sail izwis daupcijj in Ahmin Wcihannua
yah funin.

ni 'im

ik

'i\>

;

17 Habands win|)iskauron in handau
seinai, yah gahraincij) ga})rask sciii, yah
briggij) kaurn in bansta seinamma ;
nhana intandci)) funin unwhaj)nan(lin.

ij)

14 Da ahsodon hine da cempan, and
cwaedon. And liwa^t do we ?
Da saxle
he him, Ne sloa ge nanne, ne tale ne
dtij), and beoj) edhylde on eowrum aud-
lyfenum.

15 S6j)lice dam folce wcnendnm, and
eallum on hyra heoi-tan jiencondum be
lohanno, hwaider he Crist wa?re,

16 Da andswarode L»hannes, him eal-
ic eow on
lum secgcnde, Witodlice
waetere fullige ;
s6[)Hce c}nn|) strengi-a
donne ic, das ic ne com wyrdc da't ic
hys 8ceo-})wang uncnytte; he cow fullajj
on Hiilgum Giiste and on fyre.

17 And his fann ys on his handa, and
lie fcorma|) his bcrnes flore, and ga-
dcraj) hys hwaete into his berne ;
da^t
ccaf he forbarn}) on unacwcnccdlicum
fyre.

1

^ranagu|)-|)an yah an))ar |>rafstyaud8,

18 Manega odre ping bodigende, he

J>iu))Sj)illoda managoin.

da^t folc Iwrde.

2
1

;

1

III. 6-i8.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

287

6 And ech fleisch^ sclial se the helthe

6 And all flesshe shall se the saveour

of God.

7 Therfore he seide to the cumpanyes,
the whiche wenten out, that thei schulden
be baptysid of him, Kyndlis of eddris,
who schewide to 50U to flee fro wraththe
to comynge 1

8 Therfore do 56 worthi fruytis of pen-
aunce, and bigynne 5e not to seye. We
ban a fadir Abraham ; sothli I seie to
50U, God is my5ti to reise of thes
stoones the sones of Abraham.

9 Forsothe now an ax is put to the
roote of the tree ; sothli ech tree not
makynge good fruyt, schal be kitt doun,
and schal be sent in to the fier.

TO And the cumpanyes axden him,

seiynge, What therfore schulen we do ?

1

Sothli he answeringe seide to hem,
He that hath twey cootis, 5yue to him
that hath non ; and he that hath metis,
do on lyk manere.

1

Sothli and pupplicans camen for to
be baptised ; and thei seiden to him^
Maistir, what schulen we don ?

13 And he seide to hem, Do ^e no
thing more, than that that is ordeyned
to 30U.

14 Forsothe and kny5tis axiden him,
seiynge, What schulen also we do ? And
he seith to hem, Smyte ^e ^vrongfulli no
man, nether make ^e fals chalenge, and
be 5e apaid with 3oure soudis.

15 Forsoth al the peple gessinge, and
alle men thenkinge in her hertis of John,
lest peraueuture he were Crist,

16 John answeride, seyinge to alle
men, Sothli I baptise 30U in watir ;
forsothe a strengere than I schal come
aftir me, of whicli I am not worthi for
to vnbynde the thwong of his schoon ;
he schal baptyse 30U in the Hooly Gost
and fyer.

17 Whos wynewyng tool in his bond,
and he schal jiurge his corn floor, and
schal gedere the whcte in to his heme
sothli the chaffis he schal brenue in fier
vnfjucnchable.

18 Forsoth and he moncstinge manye
otlicrc thingis, euangeliside to the pcplc.

sent ofl" God.

7 Then sayde he to the people, that
were come to be baptised of hym, O
generacion of vipers, who hath shewed
you the crafte to flye from wrath to
come 1

8 Brynge forth due frutes of repent-
aunce, and begyn nott to saye in youre
selves, We have Abraham to oure father •
for I say vnto you, God is able of these
stones to reyse vppe children vnto Abra-
ham.

9 Nowe also ys the axe leyd vnto the
rote off the trees ; every tree therfore
which bringeth not forth good frute,
shalbe hewen doune, and caste in to the
fyre.

10 And the people axed him, sayinge.

What shall we do then ?

1

He answered and sayde vnto them,
He that bathe ij. coottes, lett hym parte
with him that hath none ; and he that
hath meate, let him do lyke wyse.

12 Then cam there puplicans to be
baptised ; and sayde vnto hym, Master,
what shall we do 1

13 He answered vnto them, Requyre
no more, then that which ys appoynted
vnto you.

14 The soudiers lykewyse demaunded
off hym, sayinge. And what shall we do 1
And he sayde to them, Do violence to
noo man, nether trouble eny man wrong-
fully, and be content wyth youre wages.
15 As the people were in a doute, and
all men disputed in there hertes of J lion,
whether he were very Christ,

16 Jhon answered, and sayd to them
all, I baptise you wyth water ; butt a
stronger then I commcth, whose shue
latchet I am nott worthy to vnloose ;
he will baptise you with the Holy Goost
and with fyre.

17 Which hath his fan in his bond,
and wil pourge his floorc, and will gader
his come in to hys barne ; and the
chaffe wyll he bourne with fyre that
never shalbe (luonchcd.

18 And many other thyngcs in hys cx-
hortacion, preached he vnto the people.

288

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

;

19 Herodes, so fcorJ)an daelcs rica, tta
he wjvs fram him ge|?read be dvere
Herodiadiscan, hys broder wife, and be
eallum yfelum cle Herodes dyde,

20 And ofer eall daet he ge-icte, da't

he beclysde lohannem on cwearterne.

21 S6|)lice wivs geworden, da call da^t
wiL'S gefullod, and dam Httlendc
folc
gefulledum, and gebiddeudum, heofon
wses ge-openod.

22 And se Halega Gast astah licham-
licre ansyne, on hyne swa an culfre
and stcfen wa^s of heofone geworden,
and dus cwrej), Dii eart min gecorena
sunn, on de me gelicode.

23 And se Haelend wscs on ylde swylce
jjritig wintre, dait men wendon d;et he
Wciere losepes sunu, se w»s HcHcs sunu,^
24-38 se waes Nazareth. Swa of cneor-
ysse on cneorysse, od Adam, se wa^s
Godes sunu, od fif and hund-scofentig
cneoryssa.

19 1}> Ilcrotlcs, R.i taitrarkes, c^asakans
fram iniiua bi nerodiadciii, qcii broJTS
is, yah Iji
ulla })oei gawaurlita ubila
Herod OS,

20 Anaaiauk yah j^ata ana alia, yah ga-

lauk lohanncn in karkarai.

21 Warji j'an, l)ij>e danpida alia nian-
agein, yah at Icsu ur(laui)idaninui, yah
bidyandin, usluknoda himins.

22 Yah atiddya Ahma sa Weiha leikis
siunai, swe ahaks ana ina ; yah stibna
us hiniina warl?, qil^andci, pu is sunus
meins sa liuba, in Jjuzei waila galeik-
aida.

23 Yah silba was lesus swe yere J^ri-
yetigiwe nf gakunj>ai, swaei sunus munds
was iosefis, sunaus Ileleis,

24 Sunaus !Mat]'atis, sunaus Laiwweis,
sunaus jSIailkeis, sunaus Yannins, sun-
aus loscfis,

25 Sunaus I\ratta|)iwis, sunaus Am-
nions, sunaus Naumis, sunaus Aizleiniis,
sunaus Naggais,

26 Sunaus Maha|)is, sunaus Matta|)iaus,
sunaus Saimaicinis, sunaus Iosefis, sun-
aus lodius,

27 Sunaus lohannins, sunaus Resins,
sunaus Zauraubabilis, sunaus Sala))iclis,
sunaus Nerins,

28 Sunaus ^failkeina, sunaus Ad«hins,
sunaus Kosamis, sunaus Airniodamis,
sunaus Hcris,

29 Sunaus losezis, sunaus Ailciaizairis,
sunaus I orci mis, sunaus Matta))anis, sun-
aus Laiwweis,

30 Sunaus Swmaions, sunaus fudins,
sunaus Iosefis, sunaus lohannins, sun-
aus Aileiakeiniis,

III. 19-30.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

289

19 Sothli Eroude, the forthe prince,
wlianne he was blamyd of John for
Herodias, wyf of his brother, and of alle
euels that Eroud dide,

20 Addide this ouer alle, and closide

19 Then Herode, the tetrach, when he
was rebuked of hym for Herodias, his
brother Philippes wyfe, and for all the
evyls which Herod had done,

20 Added this above all, and leyd Jhon

John in prisoun.

21 Forsoth it was don, whanne al the
peple was baptisid, and Jhesu cristenyd,
and preiynge, heuene was openyd.

22 And the Hooly Gost cam doun in
bodily licknesse, as a culuere in to him ;
and a voys was maad fro heuene, Thou
ert my dereworthe sone, in thee it hath
plesid to me.

23 And Jhesu him silf was byg}mnynge
as of thritti 3eer, that he was gessid the
sone of Joseph, which was of Hely,

24 Which was of Mathath, which was
of Leuy, wich was of Melchy, which was
of Jamne, that was of Joseph,

25 That was of Mataty, that was of
Amos, that was of Naum, that was of
Hely, that was of Nagge,

26 That was of Mathath, that was of
Mathatye, that was of Semy, that was
of Joseph, that was of Juda,

27 That was of Johanna, that was of
Resa, that was of Zorobabel, that was of
Salatiel, that was of Nery,

28 That was of Melchy, that was of
Addy, tliat was of Cosan, that was of
Elmadan, that was of Her,

29 That was of Jesu, that was of Elc-
asar, that was of Jorym, that was of
Mathath, that was of Leuy,

30 That was of Symcon, that was of
Juda, that was of Joseph, that was of
Jona, that was of Elyachini,

in preson.

21 And yt fortuned, as all the people
receaved baptim, and when Jesus was
baptised, and did praye, that heven was
opened.

22 And the Holy Goost cam doune in

a bodely shape, lyke a dove apon him
and a voyce cam from heven, sayinge.
Thou arte my dere sonne, in the do I
delyte.

23 And Jesus him silfe was about thirty
yere of age when he began, beinge as
men supposed the sonne of Joseph,
which Joseph was the sonne of Heli,

24 Which was the sonne of Mathat,
which was the sonne of Levi, which was
the sonne of Melchi, which was the sonne
of Janna, which was the sonne of Joseph,
25 Which was the sonne of Matatthias,
which was the sonne of Amos, which
was the sonne of Nahum, which was the
sonne of Esli, which was the sonne of
Nagge,

26 Wliich was the sonne of Maath,
which was the sonne of Matathias, which
was the sonne of Semei, which was the
sonne of Joseph, which was the sonne of
Juda,

27 Which was the sonne of Johanna,
which was the sonne of Rhesya, which
was the sonne of Zorobabel, which was
the sonne of Salathiel, which was the
sonne of Neri,

28 Which was the sonne of Melchi,
which was the sonne of Addi, which was
the sonne of Cosam, which was the sonne
of Helmadam, which was the sonne of
Her,

29 Wliich was the sonne of Jeso, whicli
was the sonne of Hcliescr, which was
the sonne of Joram, which was the sonne
of Mattha, wliich was the sonne of Levi,
30 Which was the sonne of Simeon,
which was tlie sonne of Ju<la, which was
the Sonne of Joseph, which was the
sonne of Jonani, which was the sonne
of Heliacim,

u

200

COTHrC,3^JO.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

31 Siinaus Mailaianis, sunaiis Afacin-
anis, sunaus ^Iatta])auis, suuaus Najjauis,
sunuus Daweidis.

32 Sunaus laissaizis, sunaus Obeidis,
sunaus IJauauzis, sunaus Salmonis, sun-
aus Nuhassonis,

33 Sunaus Amcinadabis, sunaus Ar-
amis, sunaus Aizoris, sunaus Faraizis,
suuaus iudins,

34 Sunaus lakobis, sunaus Isakis, sun-
aus Abrahamis, suuaus parins, sunaus
Nakoris,

35 Sunaus Sairokis, sunaus Ragawis,
sunaus Falaigis, sunaus Aibairis, sunaus
Salamis,

36 Sunaus Kaeinanis, sunaus Arfak-
Semis, sunaus Nauelis,

sadis, sunaus
sunaus Lamaikis,

37 Sunaus ^[ajmsalis, sunaus Ainokis,
sunaus laredis, sunaus Malcilaielis, sun-
aus Kaeinanis,

38 Sunaus Ainosis, sunaus Sedis, sun-

aus Adamis, sunaus Gu)>s.

Chap. IV.

i Ij) lesus Aliniins Weih-
is fulls gawandida sik frani Liurdauau,
yah tanluins •was 111 alimin in au))idai

2 Dage fid wort ip^uns,

fraisans fram
diabulaii, yah ni niatida wailit in daLrani
yainaiin; yah at ustauhauaiin ))aiin dag-
am, bi|jc grcdags warjn

3 Yah (|a|) du "imnia diabulus, Yabai
sunaus siyais GuJ)S, qi|) jnimma staina,
ei wair|iai hlaibs.

4 Yah andhof Icsus wi))ra ina qi|)ands,

Chap. IV.

i S6}>lice se Pljelcnd wa»9
full Haligum Gjiste and fcrdo fram lord-
ano, and he "w.-vs fram Haliyfum Gaste
gela^d on sumum wcstcne

2 Feowertig daga, and wa^s fram dcofle
costod, and he on dam daLTUm nan jniig
ne a^t ; and clam gefyllcdum dagum,
bine hinnredc.

3 Da cwa*}) se deofol him to, Gif du
sy Godes sunu, sege disum stanc, da^t
he to hlafe geweorde.

4 Da andswarode him se Haclcnd, Hit

III. 3 1. -IV. 4] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

291

;

31 That was of Melca, that was of
Menna, that was of Mathatha, that was
of Nathan, that was of Dauith,

3 2 That was of Jesse, that was of Obeth,
that was of Booz, that v/as of Salmon,
that was of Nason,

33 That was of Amynadab, that was of
Aram, that was of Esrom, that was of
Phares, that was of Judas,

34 That was of Jacob, that was of
Ysaac, that was of Abraham, that was
of Tare, that was of Nacor,

35 That was of Seruch, that was of
Ragau, that was of Phaleth, that was of
Heber, that was of Sale,

36 That was of Caynan, that was of
Arfaxat, that was of Sem, that was of
Noe, that was of Lameth,

37 That was of Matusale, that was of
Enok, that was of Jareth, that was of
Malaliel, that was of Caynan,

38 That was of Enos, that was of Seth,

that was of Adam, that was of God.

31 Which was the sonne of Melea,
which was the sonne of Menam, which
was the sonne of Mathathan, which was
the sonne of Nathan, which was the
sonne of David,

32 Which was the sonne of Jesse, which
was the sonne of Obed, which was the
sonne of Boos, which was the sonne of
Salmon, which was the sonne of Naason,
33 Which was the sonne of Aminadab,
which was the sonne of Aram, which
was the sonne of Esrom, which was the
sonne of Phares, which was the sonne of
Juda,

34 Which was the sonne of Jacob,
which was the sonne of Ysaac, which
was the sonne of Abraham, which was
the Sonne of Tharra, which was the sonne
of Nachor,

35 Which was the sonne of Saruch,
which was the sonne of Ragan, which
was the sonne of Phalec, which was the
sonne of Heber, which was the sonne of
Sala,

36 Which was the sonne of Cainan,
which was the sonne of Arphaxat, which
was the sonne of Sem, which was the
sonne of Noe, which was the sonne of
Lameth,
37 Which was the sonne of Mathusala,
which was the sonne of Enoch, which
was the sonne of Jareth, which was the
sonne of Malalehel, which was the sonne
of Cainan,

38 Which was the sonne of Enos, which
was the sonne of Seth, which was the
sonne of Adam, which was the sonne of
God.

Chap. IV.

i Forsothe Jhesu ful of
tljc Ilooly Gost turnede a3cn fro Jordan,
and was led by the spirit in to desert

2 Fourty daycs, and was tcmptid of the

deuyl, and eet no tiling in tho dayes
and tho dayes cndid, he hungride.

3 Forsothe the dcuel seide to him, If
thou ert Goddis sone, scye to this stoon,
that it be inaad })rcd.

Chap. IV.

i Jesus then full off the
Holy Goost returnyd from lordan, and
was caryed off the sprete into a wilder-
nes,

2 And was xl. daycs tempted of the
devyl, and in tlioose dayes ate he no
thinge ; and when they were ended, he
after ward hongrcd.

3 And the dcvyll sayd vnto him, Yf
thou be the sonne of God, eommaunde
this stone, that he ])c breed.

4 And Jheaus answeri«le to liim, It is

4 And Jcaus answenul hym, sayinge,

i; 2

1

202

1

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

Giiiiiclid 1st, patei ni bi
libaid muniia, ak bi all wauiJc Giijjs.

lilail) ainana

is awritcn, Da?t sc man nc lyfa}) be
hlafc anum, ac of aCdcum Godcs worde.

5 Yah ustiuliamls ina cUabulaus ana
fair*]runi hauliata, ataugida inniia allans
|)iudina6suiis j)is midyungardis in stika
melis ;

6 Yali qajj du inima sa diabulus, pus
gil)a |>ata waldufni }>ize allata, yah wuljju
I'zc, unte mis atgiban ist, yah jjiswham-
nich \>ei wilyau giba J)ata ;

5 And da laeddc so deofol hync, and
a^tywde him calle ricu cor|ian ymbc-
hwyrftcs on aure byrhtm-hwilc;

6 Aiid to him cwa'|j, Ealne clisne an-
weald ic de sylle, and hyra wuldor,
fordam de hi me synd gesealde, and ic
hi sylle dam de ic wylle ;

7 pu nu yabai inwcitis mik 'in and-

wairj'ya mciuamma, wairj?i|? j?ein all.

7 Witodlicc calle hig l)eo|) dine, gif du

gc-cadmctst beforan me.

8 Yah andhafyands imma Icsus qaj>,
Gamclid ist, Frauyan Gu})
|)cinana inwcitais, yah imma ainamma
fullafahyais.

9 J)a}>roh ^atauh ina in lainisalem,
yuh gasatida ina ana giblin allis, yah
qa|) du imma, Yabai sunus slyais Gujjs,
Nvair]) |)nk ]:a])ro dala|) ;

10 Gamclid ist auk, patci aggilum
scinaim anabiudij? bi })uk, du gat'astau
j)uk,

1

Yah |)atci ana handuni |)uk ufhab-
and, ci whan ni gastagqyais bi staina
fotu jjcinana.

I 2 Yah andhafyands qaj) imma lesus,
patci qij)an ist, Ni fraisais Frauyan Gujj
j)cinana.

13 Yah ustiuhands all

fraistol)nyo,

diabulus afsto]j tairra imma und mcl.

8 Da andswarode him se ITaelcnd,

.

Hit is awritcn, Drihten dinne
God dii gc-cadmctst, and him anum
l^eowast.

9 Da laeddc he hyne on Hieru.salem,
and gcscttc hinc ofcr djes temi»les hricg,
and him to cwae)), Gyf du sy Godes
sunu, tiscnd de heonun nyder ;

10 S6})licc hyt is awritcn, Dc-L't he hys
englum be de bebyt, diet hig de ge-
hcaldon,

1

And da^t hig de mid handum nim-
on, dc-hcs du dinne fot a?t staue a-t-
spcorne.

12 Da cwa'j> se Haelcnd him andswar-
icnde, Hyt is gecwcdcn, Ne costna dii
Drihten dinne God.

13 And calre

costnungc gc-
fyllcdrc, se deofol him sumc Invilc fram-
gcwat.

dajrc

14 Yah gawandida sik lesus in mahtai
ahmins in Galcilaian, yah nieri|)a ur-
rann and all gawi bisitandc bi ina.

14 Da fcrde se Ha'lend on g.'stos
ma'gene on Galilcam, and his hlisa be
him ferde on call da?t rice.

If) Yah is laisida in ga(|uni))im izc,

mikilids fram allaim.

16 Yah <jam in Nazarai}', |)arci was
fodi}is, yah galaij> inn bi biuhtya scin-
amma in daira sabbato in swnairoLTcin,
yah uasto)) siggwan bokos.

17 Yah atgibanos wesun inuna hokos
Eisaeiiiis, praufctus ; yah uslukands j)us
bokos, bigat stad parei was gamclid,

15 And he lah'dc be hyra gcsamnung-

um, and wa'S fram callum gcnuvrsod.

16 Dii com he to Nazareth, dar ho
afed wa^s, and he code on restc-da\ufe on
da gesannmngc a»fter his gewunau, and
he aras da^t he raedde.

17 And him wa-s gcscald Isaias boc,
da>s witegan ; and sona swa he da boo
uufeold, dti fiinde he dar awritcn,

J 8 Ahma Frauyins ana mis, in jizei
gasalboda mik ; du wailanicryan unlcd-
aim insaudida mik, du ganasyan |>ans

18 Drihtnes Gast is ofcr mc, fordam
de he smyrede me ; he sende me }>earf-
um bod i an, and geha^ftum alyscdnesse.

1

;

3
7

;

;

IV. 5-i8.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

writun, For a man lyueth not in breed
aloone, but in euery word of God.

5 And tlie deuyl ladde hym in to an
hi3 hil, and scliewide to him alle the
rewmes of the roundnesse of erthe in a
moment of a tyme ;

6 And seith to him, I schal 5yue to
thee al this power, and the glorie of
hem, for to me thei ben 5ouun, and to
whom I wole I 3yue hem

7 Therfore if thou fallinge doun schalt
worschipe bifore me, alle thingis schulen
be thine.

.

.

.

8 And Jhesus answeringe seide to him,
It is writen, Thou schalt
worschipe the Lord thi God, and to
hym aloone thou schalt serue.
9 And he ledde him in to Jerusalem,
and settide on the pynacle of the temple,
and seide to him, If thou art Goddis
sone, sende thi self fro hennis down ;

10 For it is writen. For he hath co-
maundid to his aungels of thee, that thei
kepe thee in alle thi weyes,

1

And for thei schulen in hondis take
thee, lest perauenture thou hirte thi foot
at a stoon.

12 And Jhesus answeringe seith to
him, It is seid. Thou schalt not tempte
the Lord tlii God.

13 And euery temptacioun endid, the
deuyl wcnte away fro him til to a tyme.

14 And Jhesu turnyde a^en in the
vertu of the spirit in to Galilee, and the
fame wente forth of him thur^ al the
cuntre.

15 And he tau3tc in the synagogis oi

hem, and was magnyfied of alio men.

16 And he cam to Nazareth, where
he was norischid, and he cntride by
custom in the day of saljoth in to the
syriJigogc, and roos for to rcdc.

17 And the book of Ysaie, the pro-
phetc, was takun to liim ; and as lie
turnyde the book, he fond a place where
it is writun,

iH Tlie Spirit of the Lord on mo, for
wliich tiling he anoyntide nic ; he sontc
ine for to cuaungclise to pore men, for to

TYNDALE, 1526.

293
It ys written, Man shall nott live by
breed only, butt by every worde of
God.
5 And the devyll toke him vppe into
an hye mountayne, and shewed hym all
the kyngdoms of the erth even in the
twyncklynge of an eye

6 And the devyl said vnto him, All
this power will I geve the everywhit,
and the glori of them, for that is de-
lyvered to me, and to who soever I wyll
I geve it j

7 Yf thou therfore wilt worshippe me,

they shalbe all thyne.

8 Jesus answered and sayd vnto hym,
Hence from me, Satan, for hit is written,
Thou shalt honour thy Lorde God, and
hym only serve.

9 And he caryed hym to Hierusalem,
and set him on a pynacle ot the temple,
and sayd vnto him, Yf thou be the sonne
of God, cast thy silfe doune from hens

10 For it ys written, He shall geve
hys angelles charge over the, to kepe
the,

11 And with there hondis they shall
stey the vppe, that thou hurt nott thy
fote agaynst a stone.

12 Jesus answered and sayde vnto
hym, It ys sayd, Thou shalt nott tempte
thy Lorde God.

1

And as sone as the devyll had ended
all his temptacions, he departed from
hym for a season.

14 And Jesus retourned by the power
of the spreto in to Galile, and the fame
off hym went throwe oute all the region
roundc aboute.

15 And he taught in there sinagoggcs,

and was commended off all men.

16 And he cam to Nazareth, where he
was noursed, and as hys custume was
went in to the sinagog on the saboth
daye, and stode v])pe for to rede.

1

And tliere was delyvered vnto hym
the boke off the prophet, Esaias ; and
when he liad opened the l)oke, lie founde
the ])lacc where hit was wrytten,

18 Tlie Sj)rcto off the Lorde apon me,
be cause he hath ainioyntcil
to
preaclic the gospel! to the povro he liath

nu^ ;

1

;

;

;

204

GOTniC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

gamalwidans hairtin, meryan fraliun})-
aiiaim fralet, yah blindaim siun ; fralct-
an ganiaiduns in ga|)rafsteiii

ajnd blindum gesihjje, forbrocene ge-
haclan ;

.

.

.

.

19 Meryan ycr Frauyins andanem.

19 And bodian Drihtncs andfenge ger,

20 Yah faifalj)

|)09 bokos, yah iisgib-
ands andbalita, gasat ; yah allaim in
J)izai swnagogein wesun aiigona
fair-
weityandona du imma.

2

Diigann })an rodyan du im, patei
himma daga usfulhiodcdun mela jjo in
ausam izwaraim,
22 Yah alhu

alakyo wcitwodidedun
imma, yah sildalcikidedun bi \>o waurda
anstais, \)0 usgaggandona us munj>a is.
Yah qejjuu, Niu sa ist sunus losefis 1

23 Yah qa|> du im, Aufto qi|>i}> mis jjo
silban.

gayukon, pu leiki,
Whan filu
in
Kafarnaum, tawei yah her in gr.baurjjai

hausidedum

waur)ian

liailei

}juk

))einai.

and edleanes da3g.

20 And da he da boo befeokl, he big
dam Jjene
and eah-a
heora eagan on dsere gesamnunge waer-
on on hyne behealdende.

agef, and soet ;

21 Da ongan he him to cwedan, Soji-
lice to-daeg dis gewrit is on eowrum
earura gefylled.

22 And big ealle waeron dvos

ge-
cnsewe, and wundredon be dam wordum,
de of his mii|?e eodon. And dus cwacd-
on, Nys des losepes sunu ?

23 Da cwrej) he, Witodlice ge secgaj)
me das gehcncsse, Eala lacce, gehael de
sylfne. Do her on dinum earde, swa
fela wundra swa we gehyrdon gedone
on Cafarnaum.

24 Qa|> jnm, Amen izwis qij'a, j^ntei ni
ainshun praufete andanems ist in ga-
baurjnii seinai.

25 A|;|)an bi sunyai qi|)a izwis, jjatei
managos widuwons wesun in dagam
Heleiins in Israela, J'an galuknoda him-
ins du yeram jjrim yah nicnojjs saihs, swe
warjj huhrus mikils and alhi airjja

24 Da cwrej) he, S6|>lice ic eow secge,
daet nan witega nis andfenge on his
edele.

25 Sojjlice ic eow secge, manega wud-
ewan wseron on Helias dagura on Is-
raliel, da da seo heofon wa's belocen
|?reo ger and syx m6nj)as, da wa^s ge-
worden mycel hunger on ealre eor|nui

26 Yah ni du ainailuin jjizo insandijis
was Helias, alya in Saraipta Seidonais,
du qinon widuwon.

27 Yah nianagai {n-utsfdlai wesun, uf
Israehi, yah
alya

llaih'isaiu, praufctau,
ni ainslmn ize
Naiman sa Saur.

gahrainids was,

in

28 Yah fullai waur|)un alhii niodis in

})izai swnagogein, hausyandans ]>ata.

29 Yah usstandandans, uskusun imma
ut us baurg, yah bralitedun ina und
aulmiisto j)is fairgunyis ana |MUHmei so
baurgs ize gatimrichi was, (hi af(b*ausyan
ina j)aj)ro.

30 Ij) is jjairhlei {lands {niirli midyans

ins i(hlya ;

26 And to dara nilnum nfrs Helias
anre wudewan, on

biiton

to

ascnd,
Sarepta Sidonie.

27 And manega lic-jiroweras w;vron
on Israhcl, under lleliseo, dam witegan,
and hyra nan na^s
biiton
Naaman se Sirisca.

ticlccnsod,

28 Da wurdon big ealle on d.Tre ge-
sanmunge mid yrre gefylled, das ))ing
gehyrende.

29 And big arisen, and scufon bine
of da»re ceastre, and licddon hine ofcr
dajs muntes cna»pp ofcr done hyra burh
getimbrod wa'S, dait
hi hine nydcr-
bescufon.

30 Da ferde he jiurh hyra midlen ;

31 Yah gahiiji in Kafarnaum, baurg

31 And he fcrdc to Cafarnaum^ on

1
1

;

9
1

;

IV. 19-31.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1^26.

295

heele contrite men in herte, and for to
preche remyscioun to caytifs, and si^t
to blynde men ; and for to delyuere
brokun men in to remiscioun

19 For to preche the ^eer of the Lord

plesaunt, and the day of 5eldynge.

20 And whanne he hadde closid the
book, he ^af a^ein to the mynystre, and
sat ; and the y^en of alle men in the
synagoge weren biholdinge in to him.

2

Sothli he bigan for to seie to hem,
For in this day this scripture is fulfillid
in 5oure eeris.

22 And alle men ^auen witnessinge to
him, and wondriden in the wordis of
grace, that camen forth of his mouth.
And thei seiden, Wher this is not the
sone of Joseph 1

23 And he seide to hem, Sothli ^e
schulen seie to me this liknesse, Leeche,
Thei sayden, Hou grete
heele thi silf.
thingis han we herd don in Capharnaum,
make thou and here in thi cuntre.

24 Sothli he seith, Treuli I seie to
50U, for no man prophete is receyued in
his owne cuntre.

25 In treuthe I seie to 50U, for manye
widewis weren in the dayes of Elye, the
prophete, in Israel, whanne heuene was
closid
monethis,
whanne greet hungir was maad in euery
lond;

^eer and sixe

thre

26 And to non of hem was Elye sent,
no but to Sarepta of Sydon, to a wom-
man widowe.

27 And manye meselis weren in Israel,
vndir Elyse, the prophete, and non of
hem was clensid, no but Naman of Sirie.

28 And alle in the synagoge heer-
ingo thes thingis, weren fulfillid with
wraththe.

29 And thei risen vp, and castidcn out
him with outc the citcc, and loddc him
to the cop of the hil on which tlic cite
of hem is foundid, that thei schuldcn
caste him doun.

30 Sothly Jlicsus passynge wcntc thorw

the niyddil of hem ;

3

And he cam doun in to Cafarnaum,

sent me, and to heale them which are
troubled
in there hertes, to preache
deliveraunce to the captive, and sight to
the blynde ; and frely to sett att liberte
them that are brused

And to preache the aceptable yeare

1

off the Lorde.

20 And he cloosed the booke, and gave
it agayne to the minister, and sate
doune ; and the eyes off all thatt were
in the synagog were fastened on hym.

2

And he began to saye vnto them,
This daye ys thys scripture fulfilled in
youre eares.

22 And all they bare hym witnes, and
wondred att the gracious wordes, which
preceded oute off hys mouth. And sayde,
Is not this Josephs sonne 1

23 And he sayde vnto them, Ye maye
very wele saye vnto me this proverbe,
Whatsoever
Visicion, heale thy silfe.
we have herd done in Capernaum, do
the same here lyk wyse in thyne awne
countre.

24 And he sayde, Verely I saye vnto
you, no prophet is accepted in his awne
countre.

25 But I tell you off a trueth, many
wyddowes were in Israhell in the dayes
off Helyas, when hevyn was shet thre
yeres and syxe monethes, when greate
fammisshment was troughoute all the
londe j

26 And vnto none off them was Helyas
sent, save in to Sarepta besydes Sydon,
vnto a woman that was a widow.

27 And many leppers were in Israhel,
in the tyme off Heliseus, the prophet,
and yet none off them was healed, sav-
ynge Naaman off Siria.

28 And as many as were in the sinagog
when they herde that, wer filled with
wrath.

29 And rooae vppc, and thrust hyra
outc of tlic cite, and lc(Mc hym even
vnto tlio edge of the hill wlicron their
cite was biltc, to cast hym doune hcd-
lynge.

30 But he went his waye even thorowc

the niyddcs of them ;

3 r And cam in to Capernaum, a cite

290

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

Galciliiiaf?, yah was laisyands ins 'in sab-
batini.

32 Yah sihlaloikidcdup hi j'o hiiscin is,

unte in waldufnya was waurd is.

Callkiscc ccastre, and hi dar on restc-
da^^uni Irerdc.

32 And hig \viindrcdon be his lure,

fordam his spraec on anwealde waes.

33 Yah in )?izai swna^o<]fein was man-
na hahands alinian unhul|)ons unhrain-
yana, yah ufiiropida,
.34 Qij^ands, Let, wha ims yah |ju8,
Icsu Nazorcnu 1 qamt fraqistyan unsis 1
Kann ))uk whas is, sa wciha Guj)S.

35 Yah i^awhoti(hi inima lesus, qi})-
ands, Afdol)n, yah iisgai,'g us jnininia.
Yah gawairpands ina sa unhulj?a in
midyaini, urrann af imma, ni waihtai
gaska))yands imnia.

36 Yah war]> afslaujman allans, yah
rodidodun du sis misso, qi|nin(hins, Wlia
waurde jjata, |)atc'i mi}> wakhifnya yah
mahtai analiiudij? jaim uuhrainyam ah-
mam, yali usgaggand 1
37 Yah usiddya meri|)a fram imma and
alhms stadins j)is bisunyanc landis.

33 And on hyra gesamnunge wa?s sum
man unclaene dcofol haibbende, and he
hrymde miceh'c stefne,

34 And cwae}), Lett, la Nadzarenisca
Hivlcnd, hwa3t is us and de ? com dii
Ic Wut, dict du
us to forspilhmne 1
eart Godes halcga.

35 And da cidde him se Hsclend, and
And
cwaij>, A'dumba, and gji him of.
da he iit-adraf hine on heora midlcne,
he him fram-gewat, and him luilit ne
dcrede.

36 Da wiirdon liig ealle forhtc, and
S])r9econ him bctwynan, and cwaMlon,
Hwait ys da3t word, da^t he on mihtc
and on
jjastum
bcbyt, and hig ut-ga}) ?

unclaenum

ma^jxene

37 Da wa^s his hlisa gcwidmaersod on
ailccrc stowe da?s rices.''"

38 Usstandands |)an us |)izai swnagogai,
gahii|) in gard Scimonis ;
swailn'o j^an
})is Scimonis was analiabaida brinnon
mikilai, yah bedun ina bi jjo.

39 Yali atstanchmds ufar iya, gasok
|)izai brinnon, yali afiailot iya ; suusaiw
J)an usstandandci andbahtida im.

38 S6|)lice he aras of heora gesam-
nunge, and ferde on Simones hus ; da
wees Simones sweger
cm
mycclum fcferum, and hig hyne for
hyre ba?don.

geswcnced

39 And he standendc ofer hig, dam
fefcre behead, and lie hig forlct ; and
heo sona aras and him |)cnodc.

\o ^[il)j'anci j^an sagq sunno, alhii swa
managai swc liabaidcMhin siukans sauh-
tim missaleikaim, bralitcdun ins at im-
ma ;
IS, ainwliaryammeh ize handuns
analagyands, galiaili(hi ins.

i[>

41 Usi(klyo(hin j'an yali unludj>ons af
managaim, hroj^yandeins, yah (jij'and-
cins, patci })U is Christus sunns (Ju|>s.
Yah gasiikands im ni lailot |)()S rodyun,
unte wissedun silban Christu ina wisan.

40 S6}'licc da sunne asfdi, calle do
untrumc wa?ron on mislicum adliim, hig
lanldon him to ; and he, syndrygum hys
hand on-settende, hig gehaelde.

41 Da ferdon da deoflu of manegum,
hrymende, and cwedende, S6|>es dii cart
And he ne gcj^afodc da't
Godes sunu.
hig aMiig }>ing spraecon, fordam dc hig
wiston da3t he Crist wa^s.

42 Bijjch, |)an wurj> dags, usgaggands,
gahiij) ana au|)yana stad ; yah manag-
cins sokifh'ihm ina, yali (jcmun uud ina,
yah gahabaiiU(hin ina, ci ni aili|)i tairra
im.

43 paruh is <iaj> du im, patci yali ))aim

42 Da, gcwordcnum da^ge, se Ila'lcnd
ut-gangende, ferde on weste stowe; and
da maMicgu hine sohton, and hi comon
to him, and beluvfdon hine, da>t he him
fram nc jxcwite.
43 Da sa6de he him, S6j)lice me gc-

;
;

.

IV. 32-43.] WYCLIFFE, 13S9.

TYNDALE, if-,26.

297

a citee of Galilee, and tliere he tau5te
hem m the sabothis.
32 And thei weren astonyed in his

teching, for his word was in power.

33 And in the synagoge was a man
hauynge an vnclene fend, and he criede
with greet vois,

34 Seyinge, Suffre, what to vs and to
hast thou
I knowe thee,

thee, Jhesus of Nazareth 1
comen for to leese vs *?
that thou art the hooly of God.

35 And Jhesu blamyde him, seyinge,
Waxe doumbe, and go out fro him. And
whanne the fend hadde cast him forth
in to the myddel, he wente a wey fro
him, and 3it noyede hym no thing.

36 And drede is maad in alle men, and
thei spaken to gidere, seyinge, What is
this word, for in power and vertu he
comaundith to vnclene spiritis, and thei
gon out?
37 And the fame was pupplischid of
hym in to ech place of the cuntre.

38 Forsothe Jhesu risynge of the syna-

goge, entride in to the hous of Symount
sothli the modir of Symondis wyf was
feueris, and thei
Iiolden with grete
preieden him for hir.

39 And Jhesu stondinge on hir, co-
maundide to the feuir, and it lefte hir
and anon sche risynge mynystride to
hem.

40 Forsoth whanne the sunne wente
doun, alle that hadden sike men with
dyucrse langwischingis, ledden hem to
hym ; and he, puttinge hondis to ech
by him silf, heelide hem.

41 Sothli fendis wenten out fro manyc,
criynge, and seyinge, For thou ert the
sone of God. And he ]>lamynge suffridc
not hem for to speke, for thei wistcn
him to be Crist.

42 Sotlili, tlie day maad, he gon out,
wente in to desert place ; and the cum-
pcnyes of pe[)h; sou^tcin him, and tlici
camcn til to him, and thei hcldcn him,
that he schnlde not go awcy fro hem.

43 To whiche he scydc, For aud to

of Galile, and there taught them on the
sabboth dayes.

32 And they were a stonied at his
doctrine, for hys preachinge was with
power.
33 And in the sinagoge there was a
man which had a foule sprete whith in
hiin, and cryed with a loude voyce,

34 Sayinge, Let me alone, what haste
thou to do wyth vs, thou Jesus off Naza-
reth 1 arte thou come to destroye vs ? I
knowe the what thou arte, thou arte the
holy man of God.

35 And Jesus rebuked hym, sayinge,
Hoolde thy peace, and come oute of
hym. And the devyle threwe him in
the myddes of them, and cam oute of
hym, and hurt hym not.

36 And feare cam on them all, and
they spake amonge them selves, sayinge.
What manner a thinge is this, for with
auctorite and power he commaundeth
the foule spretes, and they come out 1

37 And the fame of hym spreed abroode
throwoute all places of the countre round
aboute

38 And he roose vppe and cam oute of
the synagoge, and entred into Simons
housse j and Simons motherelawe was
taken wyth a greate fever, and they
made intercession to him for her.
39 And he stode over her, and rebuked
the fever, and hit leeft her ; and imme-
roose and ministred vnto
diatly she
them.

40 When the sun was doune, all they
that had sicke taken with divers dcseases,
brought them vnto him ; and he layde
his hondes on every won of them, and
healed them.

41 And devils also cam out of many
of them, cryinge, and saying, Tliou arte
Christ the sonnc of (;!od. And he re-
buked them and suffered thcni nott to
speake, for they knewe that he was
Christ.

42 As sone as it was dayc, he departed,
and went awayc into a desert ])lace ;
and the ])(!()j)]e sought hym, and cam to
hym, and kept hym, that he shuhlc not
dei)art(; from them.

43 And he saydc vnto them, I musto

208

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

anjiaraim baurgim wailamcn'nn ik skal
bi |)iu(langarclya Gu|)S, uutc clu|>c mik
insandida.

44 Yah was mcryands in swnagogim

Galeilaias.

dafenaj?
bodian, fordam to dam ic eom usend.

ceastiinn Godes rice

6<1rum

44 And he waes bodigende on Galilea

gesamnungum.

Chap. V. i Yah war)?, mi))|)anei man-
aj;ci anatramp iiia, du hausyan waurd
Gujjs, yah is silba was standands newha
saiwa Gairinesaraij>,

Chap. V.

i 'S6})lice wses gcwordcn,
da da manegu him to comon, da-t hig
Godes word gehyrdon, he stod wid done
mere Genesareth,

2 Yah gasawh twa skipa standandona
i\> fiskyans afgagg-

at j)amnia saiwa ;
andans af im, us[)Wohuu natya.

2 And he geseah twa scipu standende
wid done mere ; da fisceras eodon, and
woxou heora nett.

3 Galai}) l^an in ain ]nze skipe, |>atei
was Seimonis, haihait ina aftiuhan fairra
leitil ; yah gasitands laisida us
stajja
|)amma skipa manageins.

3 He da astigende on an scyp, da^t
wses Simones, baed hyne da?t he hit
lyt-hwon fram hinde tuge ; and on dam
scipe sittende he lafrde da maenegu.

4 Bi|)ch |)an ganan})ida rodyands, qaj)
du Seimonau, Brigg ana diupijja, yah
athahid \>o natya izwara du fiskon.

4 Da he sprecan geswac, he cwa3[) to
Simone, Teoh hit on dypan, and lactaj)
eowre nett on done fisc-wer.

5 Yah andhafyands Seimon qa|> du im-
ma, Talzyand, alhx naht ))airhai'baidyand-
ans waiht ni ncmum, i|> afar waurda
))einamma wairpam natya.

6 Yah |)ata tauyandans, galukun man-
agcin fiske filu ; swe natya dishniipno-
dcdun ize.

5 Da cwrej) Simon him andswariende,
Eala bebeodend, ealle
nilit swinccnde
we naht ne gcfengon, s6|)lice on dinum
worde ic min nett ut-laete.

6 And da hi dtvt dydon, hig ])ctugon
mycelc mcnigeo fixa ; and hyra net wa s
tobrocen.

7 Yah bandwidcdun gamanam, jioci
wcsun in an|)araniina skipa, ci atiddycd-
Yah qemun, yah ga-
cina, hilpan ize.
fullil)edun ba |)0 skipa, swe sugqun.

8 Gaumyands jmn Seimon Paitrus,
diiius (hi kniwam losuis, (ji)mnds, Bidya
\nik usgagg fairra mis, unte manna fra-
waurlits im, Frauya.

9 Sihhdoik auk (lishal)aida ina, yah
allans J'ans mi{) i'mma, in gafahis ^ize
fiske j'anzei ganutun.

7 And hig bicnodon h}Ta geferan, de
on odrum scipe wa?ron, da^t hi comon,
and him fylston. Da comon hig, and
gefyldon butu da scipu, swa diet hi neh
Wccron ]>esencte.

8 Da Petrus daet geseah, he feoll to
da«s Hadendes cnoownm, and cwa^|i,
Drihten, gewit fram me, fordam ic eom
synfull mann.

9 And lie A\imdrode, and ealle da do
mid him waron, on dam were dara fixa
de hi gcfengon.

10 Samalcikoh |mn yah lak(>l)au yah
lohannen, suniins Zaibaidaiaus. j'aioi wcs-
un gaihiilans Scimona.
Yah qa|) du
Scimona leans, Ni 01,'s |)us ; fram him-
ma uu mannc siud nutans.

10 Gelice lacobum and

Tohannem,
Zcbedcis suna, da waeron Simones ge-
fcran. Da cwa^j) se Haclend to Simone,
Ne ondr.-rd dii de ; heouonforj) du l)yst
men gcfonde.

;

IV. 44-V. lo.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

299

othere citees it bihoueth me for to euaun-
gelise the kyngdom of God, for therfore
I am sente.
44 And he was prechinge in the syna-

gogis of Galilee.

to other cities also preace the worde of
God, for therfore am I sent.

44 And he preached in the synagoges
off Galile.

Chap. V. i Sotheli it was don, whanne
cumpanyes of peple felden in^ to Jhesu,
that thei schulden heere the word of
God, and he stood bisydis the stondinge
watir of Genasereth,

2 And sy3 twey bootis stondinge bi-
sydis the stonding watir ;
sothli the
fischeris hadden gon doun, and waischide
nettis.

3 Sothli he sti3ynge in to a boot, that
was Symoundis, preiede him to lede
a3en a litil fro the lond ; and he sittinge
tau3te the cumpanyes fro the boot.

4 Sothli as he ceesside to speke, he
seide to Symound, Lede thou in to hi3,
and slake 3e 3oure nettis
in to the
takinge.

5 And Symount answeringe seide to
him, Comaundour, we trauelinge by al
the ny3t token no thing, but in thi word
I schal leye out the nett.

6 And whanne thei hadden don this
thing, thei closiden to gidere a plenteu-
ous multitude of fysches ; forsoth her
nett was broken.

7 And thei bekenyden to felowis, that
weren in an othir boot, that thei schulden
come, and helpe hem. And thei camen,
and filliden bothe litle bootis, so that
thei wercn al moost drenchid.

8 Which thing whanne Symound Petre
8y3, he felde doun to the knees of Jhesu,
seyinge. Lord, go fro me, for I am a man
synnere.

9 Sothli

greet wondir hadde bigon
aboute him, and allc that weren with
him, in the takinge of fischca whiche
thei tookcn.

10 Sothli in lyk manero James and
John, the Honos of Z<;be(le, wliiche wercn
felowi.s of Symount Petre. And Jhesu
Bcith to Symound, Nyle tliou drede ;
now fro thi.s tymc thou schult be tuk-
ynge men.

Chap. V.

i Hit cam to passe, as the
people preased apon hym, to heare the
worde off God, that he stode by the lake
of Genazareth,

2 And sawe two shippes stonde by the
lake syde ; for the fisshermen were gone
out of them, and were wasshynge their
nettes.

3 Jesus entred in to one of the shippes,
which perteyned to Simon, and prayed
hym that he wolde cary hym a litell
from the londe ; and he sate doune and
taught the peple out of the shippe.

4 When he had leeft speakynge, he
sayde vnto Simon, Cary vs in to the
depe, and lett slippe thy nett to make a
draught.

5 And Simon answerid and sayde to
hym, Master, we have labored all nyght
and have taken nothynge, yet nowe at
thy worde I wil loose forthe the net.

6 And when they had so done, they

inclosed a greate multitude of fisshes
and the net brake.

7 And they made signes to their fel-
owes, which were in the other shippe,
that they shulde come, and helpe them.
And they cam, and they filled bothe the
shippes, that they soncke agayne.

8 When Simon Peter sawe that, he fell
doune at Jesus knees, sayinge, Lorde,
goo from me, for I am a sinfuU man.

9 For he was vtterly astonyed, and all
that were with hym, att the draught off
fisshe which they toke.

10 And so was also James and Jhon,
the HonncH of Zcl)edci, wliicli were parte-
And Jesus sayd
takers with Simon.
vnto Simon, Fcare not ; from licncc
forthe thou shalt catchc men.

1

6
7
1

300

GOTHIC, 36o.

1

Yah gatiulijindans

\)0 skipa ana
laistidcdun

allata,

airjvi,

afiei))anclans

afar I'mma.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
And hig tugon byra scypu to landc,
hig, and folgodon Ctam

[St. Luke

1

and forleton
llcvlende.

12 Yah war|), mi|^))anci was is in ainai
haurgc, yah sai ! manna fulls |'rntsfillis ;
yali gasaiwhaiuls Icsu, diiusands ana
andwairjn, bad ina,
Frauya,
yabai wilcis, magt mik galirainyan.

qij)ands,

12 Da he wxs on anrc ccastre, da
wa3S dar an hrcofla ; and da he geseah
done Ilsclcnd, da astrehtc lie hinc, and
bred, and dus cwa)|), Drihten, g^-f dii
Wylt, dii raiht me geclaensian.

13 Yah ufi'akyands handu, attaitok
Tmma, qij^ands, Wilyau, wairj^ hrains.
Yah suns j^ata jJi-utsfiU aflaij) af iinma.

14 Yah is faurhaud "imma, ei mann ni
qc])i ; Ak gagi:^, yah atauc,^ci J)uk sill)an
gudyin, yah atbair unma fram |)izai ga-
hraincinai |jcinai, j^atei anabaud Moses,
du weitwodijjai im.

13 And he set-hran hine, his handa
ajjenede, and cwaej), Ic wylle, si dii gc-
chi'nsod. And sona se hrcofla him fram
fcrde.

14 And he behead him, dxt he liit
nanum men ne sa?de ; Ac ga, and a ty w
de dam saccrde, and bring for dinre
chvnsunge, swa Moyscs bebcad, him on
gewitnesse.

15 Usmcrnoda |)an

jjata wanrd mais
bi ina ; yah garuiinun hiuhnians nian-
agai, liausyon, yah Icikinon fi-ani imma
sauhtc seiiiaizo.

16 1|>

IS Wiis aflci])ands ana au|)idos,

15 Witodlice dies de mil sec sprscc be
him fcrde ; and myccle mcncgeo comon,
da't hi gchyrdon, and wurdon gchaelcde
fram liyra untrumncssum.

1

He da ferde on westcn, and hine

yah bidyands.

gebaed.^

17 Yali war}> in ainamma dagc, yah is
yali wcsun sitandans

was hiisyaiids ;
Faieisaiois, yah witodalaisaryos,
j^aici
wcsun gaqumanai us allamma haimo
Galeilaias, yah Judaias, yah lairnsauhv-
mon; yah mahts Frauyins was du liail-
yan ins.

18 Yah sai! mans bairandans ana ligra
niannan saci was usli|)a, yah sokidedun
whaiwa "ina innatbereina, yah galagi-
didcina in andwair|)ya is.

1

Da WJES anum dnege gewordcn, dait
he snet and hig hcrdc ; and d;i wjcron
da Farisci sittcndc, and divre se larcow-
as, da comon of sGlcum castcUum Gal-
lilc^, and Iudca% and Tlicrusalom ; and
Drihtnes maj^jcn Wics hij^: to <xcliiclcnne.

18 And da bicron men on anum bedde

anne man se wa's lama,

19 Yah ni ])igitandans whaiwa in-
natbcrcina ina, in managcins, usstcig-
andans ana lirot, and skalvos «rasatidc-
dun ilia mi}) J)aiiima badya in midyaim,
faura Icsua.

20 Yah gasaiwhands galaubcin Vzo, qa|>
du jmmma usli|)in, Manna, alloitaiula |)us
frawaurhtcis |)cinos.

21 Yah dugunnun j)ngkyan jvii bok-
aryos yali Faivisaieis, (ii|)andans, Whas
ist Sii, saci rodci}) naiteinins ? whas mag
aflotnn frawaurlitiiis. alya ains Ow])!

22 Ufkuunaiids j'an Usus mituiiiiis izc,

19 And hig ne mihton hinc in bringan
and alccgan boforan him, for da^rc meii-
igco de mid dam Ha'lcndc wa\s,
d;i
jistigon hig uj^pan dauic hiof, and jnirh
da watclas liinc mid dam bcdde ascndon,
bcforan done Ihvlcnd.

20 Da he gcscah hyra goloafan, he
cwa'j>, La mann, de synd dine synna
forgyfcnc.

21 Da agunnon jicncan da boccras and
Farisci, and cwanlon, Hwa^t is dcs, dc
licr sj^rycj) woffunga ? hwa mieg .synna
forgyfan, biltoii (Jod ana?

22 Da yc lla31cnd gccncow liyra gc-

4
8
6

8

V. 11-22.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

301

T T And the bootis led vp to the lond,

alle thingis left, tliei sueden him.

12 And it was don, whanne he was in
con of the citees, and lo ! a man ful of
leper ; and seynge Jhesu, and fallinge
doun in to his face, preiede him, sey-
inge, Lord, if thou wolt, thou maist
make me clene.

13 And Jhesu holdinge forth the hond,
touchide him, seyinge, I wole, be thou
maad clene. And anon the lepre passide
a wey fro hym.

1

And Jhesu comatindide to him, that
he schulde seie to no man ; But go thou,
schewe thou thee to a prest, and oftVe
thou for thi clensinge, as Moyses bad, in
to witnessinge to hem.

15 Sothli the word walkide aboute the
more of him ; and manye cumpanyes
camen to gidre, that thei schulden heere,
and be heelid of her syknessis.

1

Forsothe he wente in to desert, and

preiede.

17 And it was don in oon of dayes,
and he sittinge tau3te ; and there were
Pharisees sittinge, and doctours of the
la we, that camen of ech castel of Galilee,
and of Judec, and of Jerusalem ; and
the vertu of the Lord was for to heele
syke men.

1

And loo ! men beringe in a bed a
man that was syk in palasye, and thei
sou5ten for to here in hym, and to putte
bifore him.

19 And thei not fyndinge in what part
thei schulde here him yn, for the cum-
penyc of peple, 8ti3cdcn vp on the rof,
and by the sclattis thei sentcn him doun
with the bed in to the myddil, byfore
Jhesu.

20 The fcith of whichc as Jhesu sy^,
he Hcidc, Man, thi synncs ben for3ouun
to thee.

21 And soribifl and Pharisees bigunncn
for to thcnk(;, seyinge, Who is this, tlnit
spckith IjlasphcTuyes 1 who may for3yuc
Byimes, no but God aloonc 1

22 Forsoth as Jhewu know the thou3tis

11 And they broughtt their shippes
to londe, and forsoke all, and folowed
hym.

12 And itt fortuned, that he was in a
certayne cite, and beholde ! there was a
man full of leprosy ; and when he had
spied Jesus, he fell on his face, and be-
sought hym, saying, Lorde, yfF thou
wilt, thou canst make me cleane.

13 And he strethed forth his hond, and
touched hym, sayinge, I will, be thou
And immediatly the leprosy
cleane.
departed from hym.

14 And he warned hym, that he shulde
tell no man ; But that he shulde goo,
and shewe hym silfe to the preste, and
offer for his clensynge, accordynge as
Moses commaundement was, for a witnes
vnto them.

15 But his name spreed the moare
abroade ; and the people cam togedder,
to heare, and to be healed of hym of
infirmities.

16 And he kepte hym silfe aparte in
the wildernes, and gave hym silfe to
prayer.

17 And itt happened on a certayne
daye, that he taught ; and there sate tlio
Pharises, and doctours of lawe, whicli
were come out off all the touncs of
Galile, Jewry, and Jerusalem ; and the
power off the Lorde was to heale them.

1

And beholde ! men brougt a man
lyinge in hys beed which was taken with
the palsey, and they sought meanes to
bryngc hym in, and to laye hym before
hym.

19 And when they coulde not fynde by
what waye they myght bryngc hym in,
be cause off the preace, they went vp on
the to})pc of the housse, and Ictt liym
doune tliorowc the tylynge beed and all
in the myddcs, before Jesus.

20 When he sawc their fayth, he saydo
vnto hym, Man, thy synnes arc forgeven
the.

21 And the scribes and the Pharises
began to thynk(!, sayngo, Whnt felow is
this, which sjx^akcth bhisi)heniy ] who
can forgeve synnes, butt God only ?

22

Wiien

Jesus

perceavcd

bheir

302

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

{uulliafyands (ja}) <lu im, Viha bijjagkeij)
"ill liairtuin izwaraim ?

j)ancas, he andswarigende cwa'j) to him,
Hwoet \>euce ge on eowrum heortum ?

23 Wliajiar Yst azetizo qijnin, Afletanda
|)us frawaurhteis, ])au qijjau, Urreis, yah

ei

24 Aj)})an

witeid, ))atei waldufni
habaid sa siinus mans ana air))ai aHetan
frawau ill tins, qaj) du |>ainina usli|>in, Du
qi|>a, urreis, yah ushafyands ))ata
])us
badi I'cinata, gagg 'in gard ))einana.

25 Yah sunsaiw usstandands in and-
wair}>ya ize, ushafyands ana jjamniei lag,
galai]) in gard seinana, mikilyands Gu]>.

23 Hwa^clcr is edre to cwettenne, Dc
synd dine synna forgyfene, hwivder de
ewedan, A'ris, and ga i

24 Daet ge witon, da?t manncs sunu
on eor))an anweald luef)) synna to for-
gyfanne, and he saede dam lamaii, De
ic seege, aris, nim din bed, and ga on
din bus.

25 And he sona beforan him aras, and
nam daet he on Iseg, and to his hvise
ferde, and God wuldrode.

26 Yah usfilmei dissat allans, yah mik-
ilidedun Gu|> ; yah fullai waur|)Uii ag-
isis, qijiandans, patei gasaiwham wuljjaga
liiinma daga.

26 And big ealle wundredon, and God
maersodon ; and wseron mid ege ge-
fyllede, and cwaedon, S6|)es we to-dt^g
wundru gesawon.

27 Yah afar jjata usiddya, yah ga-
sawh motari, namin Laiwwi, sitandan
Yah qaj? du imma,
ana motastada.
Laistei afar mis ;

28 Yah bileipands allaim, usstandands

27 Da lefter dam he ut-eode, and ge-
seah publicanum, he waes odrum iianian
Leui gehaten, 8et ceap-sceamule sittende.
And he cwve]> to him, Filig me ;

28 And he him da filigde, and ealle

i'ddya afar imma.

2 9 Yah gawaurhta daulit mikila Laiw-
weis imma in garda seinamma; yah was
manage! motarye mikila, yah anjjaraize
jjaiei wesuu mi|? im anakumbyandans.

30 Yah birodidedun bokaryos ize yah
Farcisaicis, du siponyam is qijiandans,
Uuwhe mi))
))aim motaryam yah fra-
"vvaurlitaini niatyid yah drigkid ?

31 Yah andhafyands lesus qa)) du im,
Ni l^aurbun hailai Icikeis, ak j)ai un-
hailans ;

32 Ni qam la))on garaihtans, ak fra-

waurhtans in idrcijxa.

33 J|)

cis qej'un du imma, Duwhe
siponyos lohannes fastand ufta, yah hid-
es tauyand, samaleiko yah Fareisaiei, i|>
|>ai |)cinai sii)onyos matyand yah drigk-
aiid ?

34 j^aruh is

qaj) du im, Ni magud
sununs l)iu|ifadis, untc sa brujifads mi))
im ist, gatauyan fastau ?

3.1

Ajtjian qimand dai^os, yah

jmn
afnimada af im sa bru)>fads, yah j'au
fastand in yainaim dagam.

hys J)iug forlet.

29 And Leui dyde hym mycehie ge-
beorseype on his husc ; and dar wa*s
mycel menegeo maufulra, and oderra de
mid him sseton.

g

30 Da murcnodon da Farisei and da
boccras, and cwsedon to liys Icorning-
cnihtum, Hwi etc ge and drinea)) mid
manfullum and synfullum 1

31 Da andswarode se Haelend and
cwrrj) to him, Ne bejmrfon Iscces da do
hale synd, ac da de unbacljie liabba)' ;

32 Ne com ic rihtwise

clypian, ac

synfulle on d?cd-b6te.

33 Da cwicdon big to him, Hwi fi^.staj)
lohannes leoming-cnihtas gclomlice, and
halsuiii^^a d6j>, and eall-swa Farisea, and
dine eta); and driucaj) ?

34 Da cwnej) he, Cwyst du mjigon d.Ts
brjMguman beam fa^stan, swa lange swa
se brydguma niyd him ys ?

35 S6])licc da daga.s cumaj>, donnc se
bryilgunia bim by)> afyrred, donue ftestaj*
big on dam dagum.

V. 23-35] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

303

'

of hem, he answeringe seide to hen,
What thenken 56 yuele thingis in 50ure
hertis 1

23 What is li3tere to seye, Synnes ben
for3ouun to thee, ethir to seie, Ryse vp,
and walke 1

24 Sothli that ^e wite, for mannis sone
hath power in erthe to for3yue synnes,
he seith to the syke man in palasy. To
thee I seie, ryse vp, take thi bed, and
go in to thin hous.

25 And anon he risinge vp bifore hem,
took the bed in which he lay, and wente
in to his hous, magnyfyinge God.

26 And greet wondir took alle men,
and thei magnyfieden God ; and thei
weren fulfillid with greet drede, seyinge,
For we ban seyn merueilouse thingis to
day.

27 And aftir thes thingis Jhesu wente
out, and sy3 a pupplican, Leeuy by name,
sittinge at the tolbothe. And he seith
to him, Sue thou me ;

28 And alle thingis forsaken, he risynge

suede him.

29 And Leuy made to him a greet
feeste in his hous ; and there was a
greet cumpanye of pupplicans, and of
othere that weren with hem, sittinge at
the mete.

30 And Farisees and the scribis of hem
grucchiden, seyinge to his disci plis, Whi
eten 3e and drynken with pupplicans
and synful men]

31 And Jhesu answeringe seith to hem,
Thei that ben hoole han no nede to a
leche, but thei that han yuele ;

32 Sothli I cam not to clepe iust men,

but synful men to penauncc.

33 And thei seiden to liim, Whi dis-
ciplis of John fasten oft, and maken
bisechingis, also and of Pharisees, but
thi discLplis eten and drynken 1

34 To wliiche ho seith, Wlicr 30 mown
make the sones of the spouse for to fuste,
the while the spouse is with hem ]

35 Sothli daycs schulcn come, whanne
the spouse sclial be taken awey fro hem,
thunne thei scliulcn fiistc in tho duyes.

thoughtes, he answered and sayde vnto
them, What thynke ye in youre hertes %

23 Whether is easyar to saye, Thy synnes
are forgeven the, or to saye, Rise, and
walke ?

24 That ye maye knowe, that the sonne
off man hath power to forgeve synnes
on erth, he sayde vnto the sicke of the
palyse, I saye to the, aryse, take vp thy
beed, and goo home to thy housse.

25 And immediatly he rose vp before
them all, and toke vp his beed where on
he laye, and departed to his awne housse,
praysynge God.

26 And they were all amased, and they
lauded God ; and were filled with feare,
sayinge. We have sene straunge thynges
to daye.

27 And after that he went forthe, and
sawe a publican, named Levi, sittynge
at the receyte off custome. And sayde
vnto hym, Folow me ;

28 And he leeft all, roose vppe and

folowed hym.

29 And that same Levi made him a
greate feaste at home in his awne housse ;
and there was a greate company of pub-
licans, and off other, that sate at meate
with hym.

scribes

30 And the

and Pharises
grudged agaynst his disciples, sainge,
Why eate ye and drynke ye with publi-
cans and synners 1

31 Jesus answered and sayde vnto
them. They that are whole nede not of
the phisicion, but they that are sicke ;

32 I cam not to call the rightewes to

repentaunce, but the synners.
33 They sayde vnto hym. Why do the
disciples off Jhon fast often, and praye,
and the disciples of the Pharises also,
and thyne eate and drynke 1

34 To whome he sayde, Can ye make
the children of the weddynge fast, as
longe as the brydegrome is present with
tlicni 1

35 The (liiyes will come, when the bryd-
groine shalhe taken awayc from them,
then shall they fust in thoosc duyes.

304

GOTHIC, 360.

36 (^;i|>uli

|ian yali

ainsliuii

j)lat

t^rayiikon du im ;
iiiuyis ni
siiagiiis

])atci
lairyid ana suagan fairnyana ;
ai|))mu
yah sa niuya aftaiiriiid, yah }:amina
af j;ainma
fairiiyiii

gatiinid

j'ata

ni

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

36 Da sacdc he Inm an bigspcll ; No
asent nan man scyp of niwuin reafe on
eald reaf; elles daet niwe slit, and se
niwa scyp ne hylpj) dam ealdan.

iiiuyni.

bali^ins laiiuyans ;

37 Yali aiiishiiu ni giutid wcin niuyata
ai[)[)au distairid
in
})ata niuyo wein })ans balgins, yah silbo
usgutnij), yah j?ai balgeis fraqistuand.

37 Ne nfin man ne sent niwe win on
calde bytta ; elles dajt niwe win bryc})
da bytta, and daet win by)> agoten, and
da bytta forwurda}).

38 Ak wein yuggata in balgins niuyans

giutand, yah bayoj)S gafastanda.

39 Yali ainshun driggandanc fairni, ni
qij>i|> auk, pata fairnyo

suns wili yugg ;
batizo "list.

38 Ac niwe wTn is to sendenne on
niwe bytta, donne beo|> da bytta ge-
liealdene.

39 And ne drinc|> nan man cald win,
and wylle sona dnet niwe ;
he cwyjj,
Dset ealde is bctere.

Chap. VI.

i Yali war|> in sabbato
an|>aramnia fruniin, gaggaii iinma juiirh
atisk, yah raupidodiin alisa siponyos is ;
yah niatidedun, bnauandaiis haiidum.

2

1\) sumai Farcisaie qc|jun du i'm,
Wha tauyid, ))atci ni skuld ist tauyan in
sabljato dagain 1

3 Yah andliafyands wi])ra 'ins lesus
qa|), Ni l^ata ussuggwud, |)atci gatawida
Dawcid, j)an grcdags was silba, yah jjaiei
nii|> imnia wesun ;

4 Wliaiwa inngalaij) in gard Gii|is, yah
hhiibaiis faurlagoinais usnam, yah niat-
ida, yah gaf paim mi{> sis wisandam ;
))anzei ni skuld ist matyan, nibai ainaim
gudyam.

5 Yah qa}) du i'm, patci frauya "ist sa

sunns mans, yah, |)ainma sabbato daga.

6 Yah war)' )>an "in anjiarainnia dnga
sabbato, galoij)an "iinnia in swiiagogcin,
Yah was yainar manna,
yali laisyan.
yah handns is so taihswo was |)aursus.

7 Witaidcdiinuli j)an J^ai bukaryos yah
Farcisaicis, yau in sabbato daga Icik-
inodcdi, ei bigeteina til du wrohyan
Yna.

CiiAP. VI.

I S6))lice wa?s gewordcn
on dam aefteran reste-da3ge aerest, da
he fcrde |>urh da a^ceras, hys kuruing-
cnihtas da ear pluccedon ; and mid
hyra handum gnidon, and sCton.

2 Da cwcEdon sume of dam Sundor-
halgafi, Hwi do ge, da?t eow alyied nis
on reste-dagum 1

3 Da andswarode him se Haelcnd, Ne
raedde ge diet, hwset Dauid dyde, da
hine hingredc, and da de mid him
wseron ;

4 Hu he code into Godcs juisc, and
nam da offrung-hlafas, and hig a*t, and
dam sealdc de mid him waeron ; da naeron
alyfedc to ctanne, buton sacerdum an-
um.

5 And he saede him, Da?t drihten is

maniu'S sunu, eac 8W}*lce, rcsteHhvgcs.

6 S6|>lice on odrum rcste-da\ge wa^s
gcworden, divt he on gesamnunge code,
and lirrde. And dar wxs sum man,
and his swydre hand wa's foi*scrunccn.

7 Da gy-mdon da bdconis and Farisci,
hwteder he on reste-da>ge haeldc, (Xxt hi
hyne govregdon.

8 J|)

is wissuh mitonins izc, yah qnj)
du l^unnia inarm j^ainina )>aursya hal)and-
in haiulu, Uneis, yah stand in midyaim.
J^aruh is urreisands gastoj\

I

8 S6})lice he wiste hyra gc|'ancas, and
he sanle dam men de da forscninccnan
liaiid ha'fde, A'ris, and stand her li mid-
dan.

Da aras he and stud.

V. 36.-VI. 8.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

305

36 Forsoth he seide to hem also a lik-
nesse ; For no man sendith a medling
of newe cloth in to an old cloth ; ellis
and he brekith the newe, and the med-
ling of the newe acordith not to the
oolde.
37 And no man sendith newe wyn in
to olde wyn vessel! s ; ellis the newe wyn
schal breke the wj^n vesselis, and the
wyn schal be sched out, and the wyn
vesselis schulen perische.

38 But newe wyn is to be sent in to
newe wyn vesselis, and bothe ben kept.

39 And no man drynkinge old, wole
anon newe ; sothli he seith, The olde is
the betere.

36 He spake vnto them in a simili-
tude ; No man puttheth a pece of an
newe garment into an olde vesture ; for
yf he do, then breaketh he the newe, and
the pece that was taken out of the newo
agreeth nott with the olde.
37 Also no man poureth newe wyne
into olde vessels ; yf he do, the newe
wyne breaketh the vessels, and runneth
out it silfe, and the vessels perisshe.

38 But newe wyne must be poured
into newe vessels, and booths are pre-
served.

39 Also no man that drynketh olde
wyne, strayght waye can awaye with
newe ; for he sayeth, The olde is pie-
saunter.

Chap. VI.

1 Forsothe it Is don in the
secunde firste saboth, whanne he passide
by comes, his disciplis pluckeden eeris ;
and thei frotinge with her hondis, eeten.

2 Sothli summe of the Pharisees seiden
to hem, What don ^e this, that is not
lecfful in sabotis 1

3 And Jhesu answeringe seide to hem,
Neithir 36 han rad this, that Dauith
dide, whanne he hungride, and thei that
weren with him ;

4 Hou he entride in to the hous of
God, and took looues of proposicioun,
and eet, and 3af to hem tliat weren with
him ; whiche looues it was not leefful to
ete, no but to preestis aloone.

5 And he seide to hem. For mannis

sone is lord, 36, of the saboth.

6 Sothli it was don and in an other
saboth, that he entride in to a synagoge,
and tau3te. And a man was there, and
his ri3thond was drye.

7 Forsothe scribis and Pharisees aspi-
eden him, if he schulde hcelc him in tlie
saboth, that thei sclmlden fynde cause,
wlierof thei schulden accuse liim.

8 Sotlili ho wistc the thou3tis of licm,
and he seith to the man that hadde a
drye bond, Ilisc vp, and stond in to the
myddel.

And he ri.singo stood.

Chap. VI.

i Hit happened on an
aftersaboth, they went thorowe the come
felde, and his disciples plucked the eares
of corne ; and ate them, and rubbed them
in their hondes.

2 Certayne of the Pharises sayde vnto
them, Why do ye that, which is not lau-
full to be done on the saboth dayes 1

3 Jesus answered them and sayde,
Have ye nott redde what David did,
when he hym silfe was anhungred, and
they which were with hym ;

4 Howe he went into the housse off
God, and toke, and ate the loves off
halowed breed, and gave also to them
which were with hym ; which was nott
laufuU to eate, but for the prestes only.
5 And he sayd vnto them, The sonne
of man is lorde, even of the saboth daye.
6 And it fortuned in a nothcr saboth
also, that he entred into the sinagoge,
and taught. And there was a map,
whose right hondc was dryed vp.

7 The scribes and the Pharises watched
hym, to se whether he wolde heale on
the saboth daye or not, that they myght
fynde an accusacion agaynst hym.

8 Butt he knewe their thouglites, and
sayde to the man which had the wyddrcd
lujnde, Rysc vp, and stonde foitlie in
He arose and stepped
the myddes.

fort! I e.

3or>

GOTHIC, 360.

9 Q'^}' W'^ icsus du 1111, Fraihna iz-
^vis, wlia skuld 1st sal>buto dagaiii \nu]>
saiwala
tauyan,
ganasyan, jjau iisci'istyan ]

taiiyau ]

un})iu})

|)au

[St. Luke

ANGLO SAXON, 995.
9 Da cwoej)

se Ilselend to him, Ic
ahsige cow, alyf}> on rcste-dagum wel
don, odde yfele *?
hale gedou,
hwaider de forspillan 1

sawlc

10 Yali, ussaiwhands allans 111s, qaj) du
paruh
'imma, Ufrakei j)o handu jjeina.
'is ufrakida, yah gastoj? so handus is
swaswe so aiijjara.

10 And, him callum gesceawodum mid
yrre, he ssede dam men, A'}iene dine
And he aj^enode, and his hand
hand.
wa'S gc-edniwod.

11 I}} CIS

fullai waurjnin unfrodeins,
yah rodidcduu du sis iiiisso, wha taw-
ididcina jjamma lesua.

12 Yali wai|5 "in dngam })aini, ci usid-
dya Icsus in faii'Ljuni bidyan ; yah was
iiaht }>airhwakands lu Lidai GuJ>s.

11 Da wurdon liig mid unwisdoine
gcfyllede, and spraccon bctwux liim,
hwoet liig dam Hselendc dydon.

12 S6})lice on dam daLTum, he ferde on
iinne munt hine gebiddan ; and wa3S
dar wacigeude on Godes gebcde.

war]?

13 Yah bi|)C

dags, atwopida
siponyans seinans, yah gawalyands us
ini twalib, jjanzei yah apaustuluns nam-
nida ;

14 Seiinon, })anei yah namnida Paitru,
;yah Andraian, bro))ar is, lakobu yah
lohanncn, Filippu yah Bar|>ulomaiu,

15 Ma|)})aiu yah poraan, lakobu jmna
haitanan

Scimon,

j^ana

Alfaius, yah
Zeloten,

16 ludan lakobaus, yah ludan Is-
karioten, saei yah warj) galewyauds I'ua.
17 Yah atgaggands dahi)) iiiij) im, ga-
stoj) aua stada ibnamma ; yah hiunia
siponye is, yah hansa mikila managcuis,
af allamma ludaias, yali lairusjdom, yah
|)Izc faur niarein, Twic, yah Scidone,
jniiei qemun
yah
hausyan iniuia, yah hailyau sik sauhte
sciiiaizo.

an))araizo

baurgc,

13 And da da da'g wa?s, he clypode
hys Icorninjx-cnilitas, and jxeccas twelf
of him, and da be nemde apostolas ;

14 SImonem, dnene he nemde Petrum,
and his brodor, Andream, lacobum and
lohannem, Philippum and
Earth olo-
meum,

15 Thomam and Mathcum, lacobum
Aljihei, and Simonem, se is gcnemned
Zelotes,

16 ludam lacobi, and ludam Scarioth,

se WcTS lecwa.

17 And mid him farcndum, he stod on
foldlicre stowe ; and mycel wercd his
and mycel menegco,
leorning-cnihta,
fram calre ludoa, and fram Icrusalcm,
and ofer mu|'an, and ssc-gema'rc, Tiri,
and Sydonis, da comon, da^t hi hyne
goliyrdon, and wserou of hyra adlum
gehailede.

t8 Yah \nn anahabaidnns fram nlimam

18 And da dc wrcron of unclirnum

unlirainyaiin, yali gahailidai waurjnin.

19 Yah alia manage! sokidodun attokan
"ininm, untc mahts af inima usiddya, yah
ganasida allans.

20 Yah is, usiiafyands augona scina du
eiponyam seinaim, qa|>, Audagai, yus
nnlodansi ahinin, unte izwara ist
|>iud-
angardi liiinine.

21 Audagai yus, gi-cdagans nu, unte
Audagai yus, grctaudans

sadai wair{)i}).
nu, unte ufhlohvanda.
22 Audagai siyuj),

jnin fiyand izwis

gastum gcdrehte, wa^ron gclia?lcdc.

19 And cal SCO menigco sohte hine to
ict-hrinannc, fordam dc ma?geu of him
code, and he callc gcha?ldc.

20 Da cwa'}) se Haclcnd, bcseonde to
l)is leoming-cnilitum, Eadige synd, gc
l>carfan on gaste, fordam de Godes nee
is cower.

2 1 Eadige synd, go de hingria}? nu,
f«>rdam de ge bco|' gcfyllede.
I'adige
synd, ge de mi wepa}), fordam ge lililia[>.
22 Eadige beo ge, donne cow men

2
1

;

;

;

6
8
1

;

VI. 9-2 2.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

307

9 Sotlili Jliesu seith to hem, I axe 50U,
if it is leefFul to do wel in the sabot,
ether yuele '] for to make a soule saf,
ether for to leese ^

10 And, alle men lookide aboute, he
seide to the man, Hold forth thin hond.
And he held forth, and his hond was
restorid to helthe.

1

Sothli thei weren fulfilld with vn-
wysdora, and spaken to gidere, what
thei schulden do of Jhesu.

1

Forsothe it is don in tho dayes, he
wente out in to an hil for to preye ; and
he was al ny3t dwellinge in the preier
of God.

13 And whanne the day was maad, he
clepide his disciplis, and chees twelue of
hem, whiche he clepide also apostlis

14 Symound, whom he clepide Petre,
and Andrew, his brother, James and
Jon, Philip and Bartolmew,

15 Matheu and Thomas, James Alphei,

and Symound, that is clepid Zelotis,

16 Judas of James, and Judas Scariot,

that was traitour.

17 And Jhesu comynge doun fro the
hil with hem, stood in a feeld place
and the cumpenye of his disciplis, and a
plenteuous multitude of pore peple, of al
Judee, and of Jerusalem, and of the se
coostis, and of Tire, and of Sydon, whiche
sclmlde hecre hym,
camen, that thei
and that thei schulden be heelid of her
langwisdiingis

18 And thei that weren trauelid with

vnclene spiritis, weren heelid.

19 And cell cumpeny of the peple
B0U3tcn for to touchc him, for vcrtu
wente out of him, and licclidc alle.

20 And, his y^en reysid vp in to his
scide, Uk^s.sid ha 3^, pore

discij)li.s,
men, for tlic kyngdoni of God is 3oure.

lie

21 jilcs.sid ha y,, that huiii^ren now, for
liles.sid he y,, tliat

3e schulen \h\ fillid.
wcpeii now, for y schuh-n ley3C.
22 3e schulcn be blessid, wiiannc men

9 Then sayde Jesus vnto them, I will
axe you a question, whether is it laufuU
on the saboth dayes to do goode, or to
do evill?
to save life, oder for to de-
stroye hyf?

10 And he behelde them all in com-
passe, and sayd vnto the man, Stretche
forth thy honde. He did soo, and his
honde was restored and made as whoole
as the other.

1

And they were filled full of made-
nes, and counselled won with another,
what they myght do to Jesu.

12 Hit fortuned in thoose dayes, he
went out into a mountayne for to praye ;
and continued all nyght in prayer to
God.

13 And as sone as it was daye, he
called his disciples, and of them he chose
twelve, which also he called his apo-
steles ;

14 Simon, whom also he named Peter,
and Andrew, his brother, Jannes and
Jhon, Philip and Bartlemeaw,

15 Mathew and Thomas, James the
Sonne of Alpheus, and Simon, called
Zelotes,

1

And Judas James sonne, and Judas

Iscariot, which same was the traytour.

17 And he cam doune with them, and
stode in the playne felde ; with the
company of his disciples, and a greate
multitude of people, out off all parties
off Jewry, and Jerusalem, and from tlie
see cooste off Tire, and Sidon, which
cam to heare hym, and to be healed of
their diseases

1

And they also that were vexed with

foule s])retes, and they were healed.

19 And all the people prcascd to
touchc hym, for there went vertue out
off hym, and healed ihcm all.

20 And he Icfte vp his eyes apon his
disciples, and sayde. Blessed are ye,
j)ovre, for youers is the kyngdoni off
God.

21 Blessed arc ye, that hongcr, for yc
Blessed are yc, that

shalbc satisficid.
W('j)e, for ye shall laugh.

22 Blessed arc yc, when men hate you,

X 2

308

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

mans, yah afskjiidand izwis,
Vcl-
wcityand, ya1i uswuirpaiul nainin izwar-
amma swe ul)ilaiinna, 111 sunaus mans.

yali

liatiaj), and chta|>, and onliisca}), and
awurpa|) eowerne naraan swa swa yfel,
for manucs suiia.

23 Faf,nnod Vn yainanuiia d.iga, yah
hiikid ; unte sai ! luizdo Vzwara inanaga
in hiniinam ; bi jjamma auk tawidedun
praufctuni attans ize.

23 Geblissia}j, and gefaegnia}) on ttam
dagum ; mi ! eower med is mycel on
heofenum ;
S''}>lice aefter disum j^ingum
hyra faidcras dydon dam \Nitegum.

24 A))))an wai I'zwis, |)aim gabeigam,

unte yu habaid ga|>Uiiht izwara.

25 Wai izwis yus sadans nu, unte
Wai izwis yus hlah-
grcdagai wair})i}>.
yan(huis nu, unte gaunou, yah gi*etan
duginnid.

26 Wai, ))an waila izwis qijjand alUii
samaleiko allis tawidedun ga-

mans ;
liugapraufetum attans Vzc.

27 Akci izwis qijja }:aim hausyandam,
friyod jmns hatandaiis Vzwis, waihi tau-
yaid jniim fiyandam izwis ;

28 J'iuj>yaij)

fra(|i|)andans izwis,
bidyaid fram |)aini anamahtyaudam iz-

))aiis

"wis.

29 panima stautandin |)uk bi kinnu,
galcwci imma yah an])ara ; yah jnimma
nimandin af j)us wastya, yah, paida ni
waiyais.

30 Whammeh Jjan bidyandane |)uk gif,
yali af Jiamina nimandin J>ein, ni lausei.

31 Yah swaswe wileid ei tauyaina iz-
wis mans, yah yus tauyaid im samaleiko.

32 A|>j'an yabai friyod j^ans friyondans
'izwis, wlia "izwis hiune ist 1 yah auk })ai
frawnurhtans J)ans friyondans sik fi-iyond.
33 Yali yabai |)iuj) tiiuyaid }iaim ]nu\>
tauyandam izwis, wha izwis laune ist i
))ai frawaurhtaiis j'ata samo
yah aiik
tauyand.

34 Yah yabai

leiwhid, fram }>ainiei
weneid andnimun, wha izwis laune ist 1
yah auk frawaiirlitai fr;iwaurlitaim hiwh-
aud. ei andiiimaina samalaud.

3f, Swol'auh friyod |>ans fiyands iz-
warans, |)iu|) tauyaid, yah leiwliaid, ni
waihtais uswcnans, yah wair|)i|) mizdo
sunyus
izwjira
]Iauliistins, unte is gods ist )>aim un-
fagraui yah uuselyam.

yah wair|>i|>

managa,

24 Deah-liwa?dere wa eow weligum,

fordam de ge eowerne frofer habba|\
25 Wa eow de ge fyllede synd, fordam
de ge hingria}?. Wa eow de mi hlilia]>,
fordam de ge heofia)>, and wepaj).

26 Wa eow, donne eow ealle men
aefter disum |)ingum hyra

bletsia)> ;
fsederas dydon dam .

. witegum,

27 Ac ic eow secge fordam de ge
gehyraj), lufiaj? eo\ATe fynd, do}) dam tala
de eow liatedon ;

28 Blctsia}) da de cow wirgia}), ge-

biddajj for da de eow onhiscea|>.

29 And dam de de slihj) on din ge-
wenge, wend cder agen ; and dam de
din reaf nim|>, ne forbeod him na dine
tunecan.

30 Syle selcum de de bidde, and se de
nimj) da jjing de dine synd, ne mynega
dii hyra.

31 And swa ge wylla)> diet eow men

don, doj) him gelice.

32 And hwylc |mnc is eow, gif ge
s6|d;ce syn-

lufia}) da de eow lufia}) ?
fulle lufinj) da de hi lutiji)>.

^;^ And gyf ge wel d6|> dam de eow
wel d6|j, liwyle jianc is eow 1 witodlice
dait doj) synfulle.

34 And gif ge IscDaj), dam de ge eft
tet-onfo|>, liMk'ylc |)anc is eow] s6|>lice
synfulle synfiillum la5na}>, diet hi gelice
onfou.

3f, Deah liwa\1ore luilaji eowre fynd,
ami him wel do[', and la'ne syllaj>, nan
|)ing danun eft gehihtende, and eower
med by)> mycel on lieofone, and ge beo|)
da^s lichstan beam, fordam de he is
god ofcr unj)ancfulle and ofer yfele.

;

;

;
;

VI. 23-35.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

309

schulen hate 50U, and scliulen departe
30U awey, and schulen putte schenschip
on ^oUy and schulen caste out 56ure
name as yuel, for mannis sone,

23 Joye 30 in herte in that day, and
sothli

glade 3e with oute forth ;
30ure mede is moche in heuene ;
for-
sothe vp thes thingis the fadris of hem
diden to prophetis.

loo !

and thrust you out off their companye,
and rayle on you, and abhorre youre
name as an evill thynge, for the sonne
off mannes sake.

23 Eeioyse ye then, and be gladde

for beholde ! youre rewarv^e is greate in
heven ; after this manner their fathers
entreated the prophetes.

24 Netheles woo to 50U, riche men,

24 But wo be to you, that are ryche,

that lian 30ure comfort.

25 Woo to 30U that ben fulfillid, for 36
schulen hungre. Woo to 30U that lau3hen
now, for 3e schal morne, and wepe.

for ye have ther in youre consolacion.
25 Wo be to you that are full, for ye
shall honger. Wo be to you that nowe
laugh, for ye shall wayle, and wepe.

26 Woo, whanne alle men schulen
aftir thes thingis the fadris

blesse 30U ;
of hem diden to .

. prophetis.

27 But I seie to 30U that heeren, loue
3e 30ure enemyes, do 3e wel to hem that
haten 30U

28 Blesse 3e to men cursinge 30U, preie

3e for men falsly chalengynge 30U.

29 And to him that schal smyte thee
on o cheke, 3yue also the tother ; and
fro him that takith awey fro thee a cloth,
3he, nyle thou forbede the coote.

30 Sothly 3yue to ech axinge thee, and
who takith away tho thingis that ben
thyne, axe thou not a3eyn.

31 And as 30 wolen that men do to

30U, and do 3e to hem in lyk manere.

32 And if 3e louen hem that louen 30U,
what grace ^ is to 30U] for whi and syn-
ful men louen men louynge hem.

33 And if 3e don wel to hem that don
wel to 30U, what grace is to 30W 1 sothly
and synful men don this thing.

34 And if 3e 3yucn borwynge to hem,
of whiche 30 hopen to take a3cn, what
grace is to 30U 1 for whi and synful men
lecnen to synful men, that thei taken
a3cyn cucne thingis.

35 NcthelcH louc 3c 3ourc enemyes,
and do 3c wel, and 3yuc 3c borwyng,
liopingc no thing thcrof, and 30ure mede
Hchul be moclic, and 3e Kclmlcn be the
Bones of the Hi3C8tc, for he is Ijcnyngne
on vnkyndc men and yuele men.

26 Wo be to you, when all men prayse
you ; for so did their fathers to the falce
prophetes.

27 But I saye vnto you which heare,
love youre enemys, do goode to them
whych hate you

28 Blesse them that coursse you, and
praye for them which wrongfully trouble
you.

29 And vnto hym that smyteth the
on the one cheke, offer also the other
and hym that taketh awaye thy goune,
forbid nott to take thy coote also.

30 Geve to every man that axeth of
the, and yf eny man take awaye thy
goodes, axe them nott agayne.

31 And as ye wolde that men shulde
doo to you, soo do ye to them lyke
wyse.

32 Yf ye love them which love you,
what thanke are ye worthy of? seinge
that the very synners love their lovers.

33 And yf ye do for them which do
for you, what thanke are ye worthy of ?
for the very sinners doo even the same.

34 Yflf ye Icndc to them, off whome yc
hoope to receave, what thanke shal yo
have 1 for the very synners lendc to sin-
ners, to receave as moch agayne.

35 Love yc youre enemys, do goode,
and lende, lokyngc for nothynge agayne,
and youre rcwanle sha]l)C greate, and yo
8hall)etlie chyldren off the llyewt, for he
is kyndc vnto the vnkynde and to tho
evyll.

;

;

;

310

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

36 Wiiir|)ai(l bleijjyandans, swaswc yali

36 ^Eomostlice beo|) mild-hcoiic, swa

atta izwar blci}>s 'ist.

37 Yah ni stoyid, ci
Ni aftlomyaid,
fraletaid, yah fralctanda.

ni stoyaindau.

yah ni afdomyauda

38 Gibaid, yah <:,nbada "izwis.

Mitads
goda, yah ufarfulhi, yah gawigana, yah
ufai'gutana gibada in barm izwarana ;
)>izai auk sanion niitadyon, | izaiei mitid,
mitada izwis.

eower fonder is mild-hcort.

37 Nelle ge deman, and ge ne beo})
Nelle ge genyderian, and ge
dcmede.
ne beoj) genyderode ; forgyfa|), and cow
by)j forgyfen.

38 »Sylla|>, and eow by|> geseald.

God
gcmet, and full, and gcheapod, and ofcr-
flowende hig syllaj? on eowerne bearm ;
dam sylfan gemetc cle ge mctaj^, cosv
by}j gemeten.

39 Qiij'idi |)an gayukon 'im, Ibai mag
blinds blindana tiuhanl uiu bai "in dal
gadriusand ?

39 Da ssede he him sum bigspell, Segst
dii mreg se blinda dsene blindan Isedau ?
hu ne fealla]) hig begen on diene pytt 1

40 Nist siponeis ufar laisari seinana ;
'i\) gamanwids, wharyizuh wairjjai swe
laisaris Vs.

41 A|)|)an wha gaumeis gramsta I'n
augin brojjrs J>einis, ij) anza in Jjeinannua
au^in ni ofaumcis 1

42 Ai|)|)au whaiwa magt qij>an dubrojjr
J)einamma, Broj>ar, let, ik uswairpa gram-
sta l^amnia in augin jjcinanima 1 silba in
augin J)cinamma anza ni gaumyands 1
Liuta, uswairp faurjjis jjamma anza us
augin |)einamma, yah jjan gaumyais, us-
Avairpan gramsta })amma in augin brojjrs
]>einis.

43 Ni auk 1st bagms gods, tauyands
akran ubil, nih|)an bagms ubils, tauyands
akran god ;

40 Nis se Icorning-cniht ofcr done
by)) fulfremed, gif he is

a?lc

lareow ;
swylce hys lareow.

41 Hwi gcsihst du da egle on dines
brodor eagan, and ne gesihst dieue beam,
on dinum eagan 1

42 And Ini miht du secgan dinum
breder, Brodor, Iset, da?t ic uteo da egle
of dinum ea^fan 1 and du svlf ne ere-
syhst doene beam on dinum agenum
Eala licetere, teoh serest done
eagan?
beam of d'num eagan, and donne dil
gcsihst, da't dil ateo da egle of dines
brodor eagan.

43 Nys god treow, de yfelne wa^stm
de|i, ne nis yfel treow, godue wa^stm
donde

44 Wharyizuh raihtis bagme us swc-
samma akrana uskun|)S ist.
Ni auk us
})aurnum lisanda smakkans, nih)>an us
uiwhatundyai trudanda weinabasya.

45 l^iiil^cigs manna us

))iuj'eigamma
huzda hairtins seinis usbairid jnii|>, yah
ubils manna us ubilamma huzda hairtins
seinis, usbairid ubil ; uzuh all is ufar-
fullcin hairtins rodeid muu)>3 is.

44 ^'Ic treow is be his wa^stme on-
Ne liig of j'ornum fic-a^p})la
cnawen.
DC gaderia)>, ne win-berian on gorst» ne
nirnaji.

45 God man of godum gold-horde hys
heortan god for|>-bringj>, and yfel man
of yfelum gold-horde, yfel forji-bring})

s6})lice se

miij) spyc|> swa seo heorte

}>enc]>.

46 A})J)an wha mik haitid, Frauya,

Frauya, yah ni tauyid jjatei qi|)a.

46 liwi clypigc ge me, Drihton, Drih-

ten, and ne du\> diet ic eow secge.

47 Whazuh sa gaggands du mis, yah
hausyands waurda meiiia, yah tauyands
j'o, ataugya izwis, wliamma galeiks Vst.

47 JE'\c dara de to me cymj), and mine
ic him

gehyr|>, and da dej>,

spr.xca

| aitywe, hwam he gelic is.

;

;

;

VI. 3M7-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
36 Therfore be ^e mercyful, as and

TYNDALE, 1526.

311

^6 Be ye therfore mercifull, as youre

5oure fadir is mercyful.

father ys mercifull.

37 Nyle 5e deme, and 36 sclmlen not
Nyle 5e condempne, and 56
be demyd.
schulen not be condempned ; for5yue 30,
and it schal be foi^ouun to 30U.

38 3}Tie 3e, and it schal be 5ouun to
Thei schulen ^yue in to 3oure
50U.
bosum a good raesure, and wel fill id,
and shakun to gidere, and ouerflowynge ;
forsothe by the same mesure, by which
3e schulen mete, it schal be meten to
30U.
39 Sothli he seide to hem and a lik-
nesse, Whethir a blynd man may leede
the blynde 1 whethir thei falle not bothe
in to the dyche 1

40 A disciple is not aboue the maistir
sothli ech schal be perfyt, if he is as his
maistir.

41 Sothli what seest thou in thi bro-
theris y3e a festu,"'' but thou biholdist
not a beem, w^hich is in thi owne y5e 1

42 Othir hou maist thou seye to thi
brother, Brother, suffre, I schal caste out
a festu of thin y^e 1 thou biholdist not
a beem in thin owne y3e ?
Ypocrite,
first tak out the beem of thyn y3e, and
thanne thou schalt biholde, that thou
lede out a festu of thi brotheris y3e.

43 Forsothe it is not a good tree, that
makith yucle frutis, notlier an yucle
tree, that makith goode fruytis

44 Sothli cuery tree is knowun of his
Sothli neither men gederyn fygis
fruji;.
of thornes, neither men gederyn a grape
of a Ijoysch of breris.
45 A good man of the goode tresour
of his herte bryngeth forth good thing,
and an yucl man of yucl tresour, bryng-
ith forth yucl thing ; sothli of the plentc
of the herte the mouth spckith.

46 Forsothe what clcpen 3c me, Lord,
Lord, and don not tiio thingis that I
Bcye.

47 Ech that comcth to me, and hccrith
my wordis, and doth hem, I schal achcwc
to 30U, to whom he is lyk.

37 Judge nott, and ye shall nott be
Condemne nott, and ye shall
forgeve, and ye

judged.
not be condemned ;
shalbe forgeven.

38 Geve, and yt shalbe geven vnto
Goode measure, pressed doune,
you.
shaken to gedder. and runnynge over
shall men geve into youre besomes ; for
with what measure ye • mete, with the
same shall men mete to you agayne.

39 And he put forthe a similitude vnto
them, Can the blynde ledde the blynde 1
do they nott both then fall into the
dyche 1

40 The disciple is not above his master ;
every man shalbe perfecte, even as hys
master ys.
41 Why seist thou a moote in thy
brothers eye, and considerest not the
beame, that is in thyne awne eye 1

42 Other howe cannest thou saye to
thy brother, Brother, lett me pull out
the moote that is in thyne eye ? when
thou perceavest nott the beame that is in
thyne awne eye 1
Ypocrite, cast out the
beame out off thyne awne eye first, and
then shalt thou se perfectly, to pull out
the moote out of thy brothers eye.

43 Hit is nott a goode tree, that
bryngeth forthe evyll frute, nether is
that an evyll tree, whych bryngeth forthe
goode frute

44 For every tree ys knowen by his
Nether off thornes gader men
frute.
fygges, nor of busshes gadrer they grapes.

45 A goode man off the goode treasure
off hys hert bryngeth forthe that which
ys goode, and the evyll man of the evyll
treasure ofi' hys hert, bryngeth forthe
that whych ys evyll ; for off the abound-
aunce off the hert the mought speakcth.
46 Why call ye me. Master, Master,
and do not as I bid you.

47 AVliosoevcr commeth to me, and
hcareth my sayingcs, and doeth the
same, I wyll shcwc you, to whome he
ys lyke.

;

;

312

GOTHIC, 360.

48 Galeiks ist niann timryandlii razn,
Baei grob yah gadiupida, yali gasatida
At ga-
grundmvaddyau ana staiiia.
runyon |)au waur})aiiai, bistagq awlia bi
yainaninia raziia, yah ni mahta gawag-
yan ita, gasulid auk was ana |>aninia
Btaina.

49 I)) sa hausyands, yah ni tauyands,
galeiks ist mann tiniryandin razn ana
air})ai inuh grundiiwaddyu ; })atci bistagq
flodus, yali suns gadraus ; yah warj> so
uswaltcins j^is razuis mikila.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

48 He ys gelic timbriendum men his
hus, se dealf deope, and hys grund-weall
S6|)lice geword-
ofcr ctjene stiin asettc.
eiium flode, hit flcow into dam hiise,
and hit ne mihte diet hiis astirian, hit
waes ofer dajne stan getrymed.

49 Se de gchyrj), and ne de}>, he is
gelic dam timbriendan men his hiis ofer
da eorjjan butan griind-wealle ; and diet
flud in-fieow, and hra;dlice hyt afeoll ;
and wear}) mycel hryre da?s hiises.

Chap. VII.

i Bijje }jan usfulHda alia
]>o waurda seina in liliumans mauagcius,
galaij? in Kafarnaum.

CiiAP. VII.

I S6|>lice da he ealle
his word gefylde on daes folces hlyste,
he eode into Cafarnaum.

2 Hundafade j^an sumis skalks siuk-
saei was ininia

ands, swultawairjjya,
swers.

3 Gahausyands j>an bi Icsu, insandida
du imma sinistans ludaie, bidyands ina,
ei qinii, yah ganasidedi jjana skalk is.

2 Da waes

hundred-mannes
|)eowa untrum, se woes sweltendlic, se
wa^s him dyre.

sumes

3 xVnd da he gehyrde be dam Haelende,
he sende to him ludea ealdras, and bjcd,
daet he come, and hys jjeow gehaelde.

4 1})

cis qimandans at Icsua, bedun
ina usdaudo, (ii|)andans, patei wairjs
ist, pamnici fragibis j^ata ;

4 Da hi to dam Haelende comon, hi
bsedon hyne geornlice, and dus cwaedon.
He is wyrde, diet du him tilige

5 Unte friyo]) })iuda unsara, yah swn-

5 Witodlice he lufaj' ure |ie6de, and he

agogein is gatinn-ida unsis.
61}) iesus iddyuh niij) ini. Yah yujjan
ni fairra wisandin imma {lamma garda,
insandida du imma sa hundafads fri-
yonds, qi|)ands du imma, Frauya, ni
draibei |>uk, unte ni im waiips, ci uf
hrot mcin inngaggais ;

7 I)u))oi ni mik silban wair|)ana rah-
nida, at |>us qiman ; ak (ji}) waurda, yah
gahailnid sa jjiumagus meius.

us lire samnunge getimbrode.

6 Dil ferde se Haelend mid him.

And
da he wa'S unfeor dam huse, se hundred-
man sende hys frynd to him, and ew;e}>,
Drihten, iiclle dii beon gedreht, ne com
ic wyrde, diet dii ga under mine j^ecene

7 Fordam ic ne tealde me sylfnc, dait
ic to de come ; ac cwej) din word, and
min cniht by|) gehaeled.

8 Yali jnan auk ik manna im uf wald-
ufnya gasatids, habands uf mis si 1 bin
gadrauhtins; yah qi})a du )>amma, Gagg,
yah gaggid, yah anjmranima, Qim her,
yah ([iniid, yah du skalka mcinamma,
Tawei |)ata, yah tauyid.

9 (iahausyands

|ata Iesus, sil-
dalcikida ina ; yah wandyands sik du
J'izai afarlaistyandfin sis managcin, i\ii\\

|)an

8 Ic com an man under anwealdc ge-
sett, cem]ian under me ha4>bende ; and
ic sccge dissum, Gji, and he ga^|', and
ic sccge dissum, Cum, donne cyni|) he,
and ie sccge minum |>eowe, Do dis, and
he de|).

9 Dii wundrode se Hielend, dam ge-
hyredum ; and cwie}), to diere mcnigeo
bewcnd, Sojilicc ic sccge cow, ne fiindc

;

;

;

VI 48.-VII. 9-] WYCLIFFE, 1 389.
48 He is lyk to a man bildinge an
hous, that diggide deepe, and puttide
the foundement on a stoon.
Sothli
greet flowing maad, flood was hurtlid to
that hous, and it my3te not moue it, for
it was foundid on a sad stoon.

TYNDALE, 1526.

313
48 He is lyke a man which bilt an
housse, which digged depe, and layde
the foundacion on a rocke. When the
waters arose, the fludde bett apon that
housse, and coulde nott move hyt, for it
was grounded apon a rocke.

49 Sothli he that heerith, and doth
not, is lyk to a man bildinge his hous
on erthe with oute foundement ; in to
which the flood was hurlid, and a non it
felde doun ; and the fallinge doun of
that hous is maad greet.

49 But he that heareth, and doth not,
is lyke a man that with out foundacion
bylt an housse apon the erth ; agaynst
which the fludde bet, and it fell by and
by ; and the fall of that housse was
greate.

Chap. VII.

i Forsothe whanne he
hadde fulfillid alle his wordis in to the
eeris of the peple, he entride in to Ca-
pharnaum.

2 Sothli a seruaunt of sum man cen-
turio''' hauynge yuel, was to deyinge,
which was precious to him.

3 And whanne he hadde herd of Jhesu,
he sente to him tlie eldere men of Jewis,
preiynge him, that he come, and heele
his seruaunt.

4 And, whanne thei camen to Jhesu,
thei preieden bisyli, seyinge to him, For
he is worthi, that thou ^yue to him this
thing

Chap. VII.

i When he had ended
all his sayinges in the audience of the
people, he entred into Capernaum.

2 And the servaunt off" a certayne cen-
turion was sicke, and redy to dye, whom
he made moche of.

3 And when he herde of Jesu, he sent
vnto hym the seniours of the lewes,
besechynge him, that he wolde come,
and save his servaunt.

4 And they cam to Jesus, and besought
him instantly, sayinge, He is worthy,
that thou shuldest do this for hym ;

5 For he loueth oure folk, and he

5 For he loveth oure nacion, and hath

hildide to vs a synagoge.

6 Sothly Jhesu wente with hem. And
whanne now he was not fer fro the hous,
ccnturio sente to him fi-endis, seyinge,
Lord, nyle thou be trauelid, for I am
not worthi, that thou entre vndir my
roof

7 For whicli thing and I demyde not
my silf worthi, that I schulde come to
thee ; but seye thou by word, and my
child schal ])c heclid.

8 For wlii and I am a man ordcyncd
vndir power, hauynge kny3tiH vndir mc ;
and I scic to this. Go thou, and he gotli,
anothir. Come tliou, and he
and to
Cometh, and to my seruaunt. Do thou
this thing, and he (h)tli.

9 Tlic which thing licrd, Jhesu won-
dridc ; and lie turnyd, seide to the cum-
panycs suyngc him, Trculi I scyc to 50U,

bilt vs a sinagoge.

6 And Jesus went with them. And
when he was nott farre from the housse,
the centurion sent to hym hys frendes,
sayinge vnto hym, Lorde, trouble not
thy silfe, for I am nott Avorthy, that
thou shuldest enter into my housse ;

7 Wherfore I thought nott my silfe
worthy, to come vnto the ; but saye the
worde, and my servaunt shalbe whoolc.

8 For I lyke wysc am a man vnder

power, and liave vnder me soudicrs
and I saye vnto won, Coo, and he goctli,
and to another. Come, and he comcth,
and to my servaunt. Do this, and lie
doeth it.

9 When JrsuH Iicrdc this, lie nKM-vcyh'd
at liim ; and turned iiyiu about, and
sayd to the people that folowcd l»ym, I

9
1

;

1

314

GOTHIC, 060.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

Amen qij^a 'izwis, ni in Isracla swalauJa
galaubein bigat.

ic on Israhel swa mycelne geleafan.

10 Yah gawandyandans sik,

I'n-
sandiMans, du garda, bigetun Jjana siukan
skalk liailana.

J^ai

1

Yah war)j 'in jjamma afar daga
iddya "in baurg, namnida Naen, yah
mididdyedun imma siponyos 'is ganohai
yali nianageins filu.

12 BiJ)eh j)an newha was daura |)izos
baurgs, })aruh sai ! utbaurans was nans
sunns ainaha ai]jein scinai j yah si silbo
widowo ; yah nianagei Jjizos baurgs ga-
noha mij) izai.

13 Yah gasaiwhands |)0 Frauya lesus,
infcinoda du izai, yah qa]? du izai, Ni
grct.

14 Yah duatgaggands, attaitok whilf-
tryom ;
gasto]?un.
Yah qa]), Yuggalaud, dn J>us qi])a, urreis.

|?ai bairandans

i]>

10 And d.i da ham comon, cte asende
waeron, hig gemetton halne done, de scr
untrum waes."''

1

Da wses syddan geword en he ferdc
on da ceastre, de is genemned Nairn,
and mid him ferdon liys leorning-cniht-
as ; and mycel menego.

12 Da he genealaehte

da?re ceastre
gate, da wnes dar an dead man geborcn,
anre wudewan sunu, de n;'nne oderne
njefde ; and seo wudewe wses dar ; and
mycel menegu dsere burh-ware mid
hyre.

13 Da se H?elend hig geseah, da wa?s

tre-

hicf

he mid mild-heortnesse ofer
fylled, and cwjej^ to hyre, Ne wep du na.
14 Da genealaehte he, and da cystc
set-hran ; da let-stodon da de hyne
Heelend, Eala
baeron.
geonga, de ic secge, aris.

Da cwib}>

se

15 Yah ussat sa naus, yah dugann

15 Da aras se de dead wses, and ongan

rodyan ; yah atgaf ina ai|jein is.

sprecan ; da agef he hine hys meder.

16 Dissat |?an allans agis, yah mik-
ilidcdnn Gu|), qij^andans, j^atei pranfetus
mikils urrais in unsis, yah, patei ga-
weisoda Gn]> managcins seinaizos.

17 Yah usiddya ))ata wanrd and alia

16 Da ofer-code ege hig ealle, and hig
God meersodon, and cwaedon, DaH maMC
witega on us aras, and, Dxt God hys
folc geneosode.

17 Da ferde deos spaec be him on

Indaia bi ina, yah and allans bisitands.

ealle ludea, and embe call da't rice.

18 Yah gataihun lohannen siponyos

18 Da cyddon Iohanncs leorning-cniht-

is bi alia )>o.

1

Yah athaitands twans siponye sein-
aizc iohanncs, insandida ins du lesua,
qi))ands, pu Ys sa qimanda, ]?au an})aranu
wcnyaima ?

20 Qimandans ]>an at imma |>ai wairos,
qcpun, iohanncs sa Daupyands insand-
qijjands, pu is su
ida ugkis du )>us,
qimanda, J>au an)>aranu wenyaima ?

j)an

21 J null

)>izai wheilai gahailida
nianagans af sauhtim, yah shihim, yah
ahmane nbilaize
; yah blindaim manag-
aim fiai^af siun.

22 Yah andhafyands jfcsus qa|) du im,
|)atei

Gaggandans gatcihats lohannen
yah gahausidcduts ;
gascwhuts

j>atci

as him be eallum dysum jnngum.

19 Da clypode Iohanncs twcgcn of his
leorning-cnihtum, and sende to dam
Haelende, and dus c\vie)>, Eart dii de
to cumenne cart, hwa^der de wc odrcs
sculon onbydan 1

Iohanncs se

20 T>C\ hig to him comon, dus In'g
cwa'don,
us
scnde to de, and dus cwa?)), Eart du
dc to cumenne eart, de we sculon odrcs
onbidan 1

Fulluhtcrc

21 S6j>lice on daere tide he gehaehlc
mancga of adlum, ge of witum, and of
yfelum gastum ; and mancgum bl:ndum
he gcsihj'e forgeaf.

22 Da cwae^ se Haelend, Fara}) and
cyda|> lohanne da j'ing de ge gcsawon
and gehyrdon ; da^t bliude gcseo]>, and

2
7

1

;
;

VII. 10-22.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

315

nethir iu Israel I fond so moclie feith.

10 And thei that weren sent, turnyd
a^en horn, founden the seruaunt hool,
which was syk.

11 And it was don aftirward Jhesu
wente in to a cite, that is clepid Naym,
and his disciplis ; and ful greet cum-
panye of peple wente with him.

1

Sothly whanne he cam ny5 to the
5ate of the citee, loo ! an oonlypi sone
of his modir was born out deed ; and
this was a widowe ; and moche cumpany
of the citee was with hir.

13 Whom whanne the Lord Jhesu
hadde seyn, he meuyd by mercy on hir,
seide to hir, Nyle thou wepe.

14 And he nei3ede, and touchide the
bere ; and thei that baren
stooden.
And he seith, '^on^ man, I seie to thee,
ryse vp.

15 And he that was deed sat vp, and
bigan to speke ; and he 3af him to his
modir.

16 Sothli drede took alle men, and
thei magnyfieden God, seyinge, For a
greet propliete hath risun among vs,
and. For God hath visitid his peple.

1

And this word wente out of him in
to al Judee, and in to al the cuntre
aboute.

r 8 And disciplis of John tolden him of

alle thes thingis.

19 And Jolm clepide to gidere tweyne
of his disciplis, and sente to Jhesu, sey-
inge, Art thou that art to comynge,
other we abiden another ]

saye vnto you, I have not found e soo
greate fayth, noo nott in Israhel cer-
taynly.

10 And they that wer sent, turned
backe home agayne, and founde the ser-
vaunt that was sicke, whoole.

1

And it fortuned after that he went
into a cite, called Naym, and hys dis-
ciples went with him ; and a greate
nomber off people.

12 When he cam nye to the gate off
the cite, beholde ! there was a deed man
caried out which was the only sonue of
his mother ; and she was a widowe
and moche people off the cite was with
her.

13 And the Lorde sawe her, and had
compassion on her, and sayde vnto her,
Wepe not.

14 And went, and touched the coffyn ;
and they that bare hym stode still. And
he sayde, Yonge man, I saye vnto the,
aryse.

15 And the deed sate vp, and began
to speake ; and he delivered hym to his
mother.

16 And there cam a feare on them all,
and they glorified God, sayinge, A greate
prophet ys rysen amonge vs, and, God
hath visited hys people.

17 And thys rumor off hym went forthe
throughout all Jewry, and thorowout all
the regions whych lye rounde about.

18 And vnto Jhon shewed hys disciples

off all these thynges.

19 And Jhon called vnto hym two off
hys disciples, and sent them to Jesus,
sayinge, Arte thou he that shall come,
or shall we loke for another ]

20 Sothli whanne the men haddcn
come to him, thei seiden, Jolm Baptist
sente vs to thee, seyinge. Art thou that
art to comynge, other we abiden an-
other 1

21 Forsothe in that our he hcclide
many men of her sykenessis, and woundis,
and yuele spiritis ; and he ^af 8i3t to
manyc blynde men.

22 And Jhesu answcringo scidc to
hem, 3e goynge telle a^cn to John tlio
thingis that 3c hun herd and Hvyn ; for

20 When the men wer come vnto hym,
they sayde, Jhon Baptiste sent vs vnto
the, sayinge. Arte thou he that shall
come, or shall we wayte for another %

2 1 Att that same tyme he cured many
ofl' their infirmittes, and plages, and off
evyll spretcH ; and vnto many thatt
were blynde ho gave sightt.

2 3 And he answered and sayd vnto
them, Goo youre waycs and hIicwc Jhon
what thingcH ye have herde and senc

!

316

GOTinC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON", 995.

[St. Luke

bliiulai

ussaiwhand,

j^ap^gand,
jjrutsfillai galirainyanda, baiulai galuius-
yand, naweis urreisaud, uulcdai >vaila-
mcryanda.

lialtai

hcalte ga}>, hreoflan synd gchaclede, dcafc
gehyraj), deade arisaj), jjcarfan bodia]\

23 Yah audags 1st, sawliazuh saei ni

23 And eadig ys, swa hwylc swa no

ganiarzyada "in mis.

24 At galeijjandam |>an

jjaim airum
loliannes, dugaiiii rodyan du manageia
bi lolianncn, Wlia iis'iddycdii|j in au))ida
saiwhaii 1 raus fram wiiida wagid 1

us'iddycdii)?

hnasqyaini

25 Akei wlia

salwlian 1
mannan in
ga-
]?ai in wastyom wul]?-
wasidana?
agaim yah fodcinai wisandans, in ]?iud-
aiigardyom sind.

wastyoni

Sai !

26 Akei wha usiddyeduj? sai whan ?
'izwis, yah mais

Yai qij>a

praufetu ?
praufetu.

27 Sa ist, bi j^anei gamelid 'ist, Sai

ik insandya aggilu meiuana faura and-
wair|)ya ))einaniiiia^ saei gamanweid wig
jjeiiiana faura J)iis.

28 Qijja allis izwis, maiza in baurim
qinono pranfetiis, Tohanne jjamma Daup-
yandin, ainsliun nist ;
'i]> sa minniza im-
ma in ))iudangardyai Gu})S, maiza im-
ma ist.

29 Yah alia managei gahausyandei,
yah motaryos, garaihtana domidedun
Gu)>, ufdaupidai daui)einai lohannis ;

30 ]}) Fareisaieis yah witodafastyos,
runa Gu|)S fraqe})un and sik, ui daup-
idai fram inima.

31

Whc nu galeiko |>ans
mans \)\a kunyis, yah whc siyaina ga-
Icikai 1

32 Galeikai sind barnam |'aini in ga-
runsai sitandam, yah woi>yandani seina
misso, yah qi}>andani, Swiglodedum iz-
; gaunodedum
wis, yah ni pliiisidodu))
izwis,^ yali ni gaigrotuj).

by}) on mc ge-untreowsod.

24 And da da Johannes aerend-racan
ferdon, da cwae|> se Hseicnd to dam folce
be lohanne, Hwi^ ferde gc on westene
gescon ] diet hreod de by|) mid winde
astyred-'?

25 Ac hwi ferde gc to seonne ? done
man mid Imescum reafum gcscrydne 1
da dc synd on deorw^ur|>um reafe and
on estum, [^synd on cyninga husum].

26 Ac Invi ferde ge da?ne witegan
Witodlicc ic cow sccge, he is

geseon 1
niara donne Nvitega.

27 Des is, be dam de awritcn is, Nu !
ic asende minne engel beforan
dine
ansync, se gegearwa}) diune weg bofdran
de.

28 So))licc ic eow secge, Nis betwux
w^fa bearnum, nan mserra witcga, donne
Johannes se Fulluhterc ; se de is la?ssa
on Godes rice, se is his mara.

29 And call folc dis gehyrende, Sun-
dor-halgan God lieredon, and gefullede
on Johannes fnlluhte ;

30 S6|)lice da Sundor-luilgan and da
se-gleawan, forliogodon da's llaMendos
gejiealit on him .sylfum, na fram dam
IIa?lende gefullodc.

Hwam telle ic gcHce
disse cneorisse men, and hwam synd
hi gelioe 1

31

32 Hi synd gelicc cildum on stricte
sittendum, and spccendum betwux him,
and cwcdendum, We sungon eow be
liearpan, and ge ne saltedon ; we heof-
don, and gc nc weopon.

33 Urrann raihtis lohannes sa Daup-
yands,
nih hlaif matyands, nih woin
drigkands, yah qij)i|>, Unhul})on lia])ai|>.
34 Urianii sunus mans matyands yah
drigkands, yah qi|>i{', Sai! manna afetya,
yah weindnigkya, friyonds motarye yah
frawaurhtaize.

33 S6))lice Johannes com se Fulluhterc,
hlaf nc etende, ne win drincendc, and
gc cweda)>, Dcofol-seocnyssc he ha>f|).

34 ^fannes sunu com ctcndc and drin-
cweda|>, Des man is
cendc, and ge
swclgcnd, and win drincendc, manfulra
and synfulra frcond.

!

VII. 23-34.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
blynde men seen, crokide men gou,
meselis ben maad clene, deef men heeren,
deede men rysen a5en, pore men ben
takun to prechinge of the gospel. +

23 And he that schal not be sclaundrid

in me, is blessid.

24 And whanne the messangers of
John hadden gon away, he bigan to
seye of John to the cumpanyes, What
wenten ^e out in to desert for to se ? a
reed wawid with the wynd 1

25 But what wente 5e out for to se ? a

man clothid with softe clothis 1 Lo
thei that ben in a precious cloth and in
delices, ben in housis of kyngis.

TYNDALE, 1526.

317

howe that the blynde se, the halt goo,
the lepers are clensed, the deafe heare,
the deed aryse,
to the pover is the
gospell preached.

23 And happi is he, that falleth not

by the reason of me.

24 When the messengers of Jhon wer
departed, he began to speake vnto the
people of Jhon, What went ye out for
to se in to the desert ? went ye to se a
rede shaken with the wynde 1

25 But what went ye out for to se *? a
man clothed in saufteraymenti Beholde !
they which are gorgeously apparelled
and lyve delicatly, are in kynges courtes.

26 But what thing wente 5e out for to
Sothli I seie to 30U,

a prophete 1

se 1
and more than a prophete.

27 This it

is, of whom it is ^vriten,
Lo ! I sende myn aungel byfore thi face,
the which schal make thi weye redy
bifore thee.

28 Sothly I seye to 30U, among the
childeren of wymmen, no man is more
than John Baptist, prophete ;
sothli he
that is lesse in the kyngdom of heuenes,
is more than he.

29 And al the peple heeringe, and pup-
plicans, baptisid with baptym of John,
iustifieden God ;

30 Forsoth Pharisees and wyse men of
the lawc, not baptisid of him, dispiseden
the conseil of God in hem silf.

31 Sothli the Lord seyde, Therfore to
whom schal I seye men of this gcnera-
cioun lyk, and to whom ben thei lyk 1

32 Thei ben lyk to children sittinge in
chcpinge, and spckynge to gidere, and
seyinge. We han songun to 30U with
pipis, and 30 han not daunsid ; we han
inaiid laraentacioun, and ^e han not
wept.

33 Forsoth John Baptist cam, ncthir
etingc breed, netlicr drynkynge wyn,
and 3c Hcyn, lie hath a fend.

34 Maniiis sone cam ctiiige and dryuk-
'inge, and 3c seyn, Lo ! a man deuourere,^
and drynkinge wyn, frcnd of pupplicans
and of synful men.

2 6 Butt what went ye forth to se ^ a
prophet ? Ye I saye to you, and moare
then a prophet.

27 This is he, of whom hit is wrytten,
Beholde ! I sende my messenger before
thy face, to prepare thy waye before
the.

28 I saye vnto you, a greater prophett
then Jhon, amonge wemens children, is
there none ; neverthelesse won that is
lesse in the kyngdom of God, is greater
then he.

29 And all the people that herde, and
the publicans iustified God, which wer
baptised in the baptim of Jhon ;

30 But the Pharyses and scribes de-
spised the counsell off God agaynst them
selves, and wer not baptised of hym.

31 And the Lorde sayd, Where vnto
shall I lyken the men of this generacion,
and whatt thynge are they lyke ?

32 They are lyke vnto chyldren sitt-
ynge in the market place, and cryingc
one to another, and sayinge, We have
])yped vnto you, and ye have
nott
daunsed ; we have mourned to you, and
ye have not wept.

33 For Jhon Baptist cam vnto you,
nether eatynge breed, ner drynkynge
wync, and ye sayo, He hatli the devyll.
34 The Sonne olf man is come and
cat(;th and drynketh, and ye saye, Bc-
]»ol(l(!! a mun which is a glotton, and a
drynkcr of wync, the frcnde of j)ublican3
and sinners.

;

318

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Li ke

35 Yali gasunyoda war]) liaiiclugei fram

Larnani seinaim allaim.

36 Ba)i

|>aii

i'na sums Fareisaie, ei
Yah atgaggands

inatidetli inij) inima.
'in gard J)is Fareisaiaus, aiiakumbida.

35 And wisdom is gerihtwisod on eall-

um liis bearnum.^

36 Da ba3d liinc sum of dam Sundor-
Da eode
halgum, dvet he mid him tete.
he into da^s Fariseiscan hiise, and ge-

sa^t.

37 paruh sai ! qino 'in |)izai baurg, sei
was fiawaiiilita, yah ufkuiinaiidci, jjatci
anakuinl)iiUi in razna })is Fareisaiaus,
briggandci alabalstraun balsauis j

37 And da dvct wif, do wses on da^re
ccastre, synful, dt hco oneneow, diet he
sa^t on dajs Fariseus hiise, heo brohte
h}Te sealf-box ;

38 Yah stand and ei faura fotura

is,
aftaro greitandci dugann natyan fotuns
is tagram, yah skufta haubidis seinis
biswarb, yah kukida fotum is, yah ga-
salboda Jjamma balsana.

39 Gasaiwhands })an sa Farcisaius, saei
haihait ina, rodlda sis ains, qi|)ands, Sa
ij) wesi praufetus, ufkunjjedi )?au, who
yah whileika so (jino sei tekij? imnia,
l^atei frawauihta ist.

40 Yah andliafyands lesus qa|) du
|)Us wha qi])an.

Paitrau, Scinion, skal

1|) is qa|), Laisari, qij>.

41 Twai dulgis skuhms wcsun dul-
galiaityin sumamma; ains skuUla skatte
timf Ininda, i|) an))ar fimf tiguns.

42 Ni habandani ))an whajjro usgcbcina,
Wha])ar nu |)izc, qij), mais

baiin fragaf.
nna friyod 1

38 And stod wid-a}ftan his fct, and
ongan mid h}Te tearum hys fet jjwean,
and drigde mid h}Te heafdes feaxe, and
cyste hys fet, and mid sealfe smyrede.

39 Da se Sundor-halga, de liyne in-
gelaJ)ode, daet geseah, he cwa^jj on hys
ge))anee, Gyf des man witega wjcre,
w todhce he wiste, hwa^t and hwyle dis
wif Wture de his
heo
synful is.

set-hrin)),

diet

40 Da cwa'|) se Haelend him and-
swarieude, Symon, ic habbe dc to sec-
genne sum j'ing. Da cwtej) he, Lareow,
sege donne.

41 Twegen gafol-gyldan wreron sum-
um Isenende ; an sceolde fif huud pen-
ega, and oder fiftig.

42 Da hig na'fdon hwanon hi

liyt
aguldon, he hit him bam forgeaf. llwied-
er .

. lufode hyne swydor ?

.

43 Andhafyands ))an Seimon qaj), J^ana
gawcnya, jjamnici nianagizo fragaf. par-
uh is qa]) du innna, Raihtaba stauides.

43 Da andswarode Simon, Ic wcne, se
de he mare forgeaf. Da cwie|) he, Kihte
du demdest.

44 Yah, gawandyands sik du |)i/,ai

J50
Atgaggandin in gard j'cinaua,

qinon, qaj) (hi Sciuiona, Gasaiwlus
qinou ?
wato mis ana fotuns mcinans ni gaft
ij) si tagram seinaim ganatida meiuans
fotuns, yah skufta seinamma biswarb.

44 Da bcwendc he hyne to dam wife,
and sa'de Simone, Gesyhst dii dis wif?
Ic code into dinum hiise, ne sealdest
dii me waiter to minum fotum ; deos
mid byre tearum nn'ne fet ])w6h, and
mid byre loccuni drigde.

4.", Ni kukides mis ;

si, fram ])am-
inci innati(hlya, ni swaif bikukyan fot-
ims meiuans.

ij>

46 Alcwa liaubid meinata ni salbodes ;

i)) si balsana gasalboda fotuns meiuans.

45 C0S8 du me ne sealdest ;
deos,
syddan ic in-eode, ne geswac da't heo
mine fet ne cyste.

46 W\n lieafod du mid ele ne smyred-

est ; deos smyrede mid sealfe mine fct.

47 tn J)izci

(j[ij)a

Jius, afletanda fra-

47 Fordam ic secgc de, h^TC synd

;

1

VII. 35-47] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
35 And wysdom is justified of alle her

soiies.

36 Forsotli sum Pharise preiede Jhesu,
And he
that he schulde ete with him.
entringe in to the hous of the Pharise,
sat at the mete.
37 And lo !
a womman synneresse,
that was in the citee, as sche knew, that
Jhesu hadde sete at the mete in the
hous of the Pharisee, brou3te an ala-
bastre box of oynement

38 And sche stondinge byhynde bisydis
his feet, bigan to moiste his feet with
teeris, and wypide with heeris of hir
heed, and kiste his feet, and anoyntlde
with oynement.

39 Sothli the Pharise

seynge, that
clepide him, seith with ynne him silf,
seiynge. If this were a propliete, sothli
he schulde wite, who and what manor
womman it were that touchith him, for
she is a synneresse.

40 And Jhesu answeringe seide to him,
Symound, I haue sum thing for to seye
And he seith, Maistir, seie
to thee.
thou.

41 And he answeride, Tweye dettours
were to sum leenere ;^ oon ou5te fyue
hundrid pens, and an other fyfty.

42 Sothli hem not hauynge wherof
thei schulden 3elde, he ^af frely to euer
eythir. Who therfore .
. loueth him
morel

.

43 Symound answeringe seide, I gesse,
for he to whom he frely 5af more. And
he answeride to him, Thou hast demyd
ri3tly.

44 And he, tumyd to the womman,
Bcide to Symound, Seest thou this wom-
man ?
I entride in to thi hous, thou
liast not 50uun watir to my feet ; forsoth
this v}omnin/)i hath moistid my feet with
teeris, and huLh wypt with hir heeris.

4." Tliou liast not 5ouun to me a cossc ;
r.>rsotli tliisi^omma/i, sithcn sche entride,

L'sside not to kissc my feet,
[6 I'liou liast not anoyntid myn liccd
i, itli oyle ; forsothe this oyntichj my feet
with oynement.

47 For which thing I scic to thee,

TYNDALE, 1526.

319

35 And wisdom is iustified of all her

chyldren.
36 And one off the Pharyses desired
hym, that he wolde eate with hym.
And he cam in to the Pharises housse,
and sate doune to meate.
37 And beholde ! a woman in that
cite, which was a synner, as sone as she
knewe, that Jesus sate at meate in the
Pharises housse, she brought an ala-
blaster boxe of oyntment ;

38 And she stode at his fete behynde
hym wepynge, and began to wesshe his
fete with teares, and did wipe them
with the heares off her heed, and kyssed
his fete, and anoynted them with oynt-
ment.
39 When the Pharise which bade hym
to his housse, sawe that, he spake with
in hym sylfe, sayinge, Yf this man wer
a prophet, he wolde surely have knowen,
who and what maner woman this is
which toucheth hym, for she is a synner.
40 And Jesus answered and sayde
vnto hym, Simon, I have somwhat to
saye vnto the. And he sayd, Master,
saye on,

4

There was a certayne lender which
had two detters ; the one ought five
hondred pence, and the other fifty.

42 When they had nothinge to paye,
he forgave them boothe. Which of them,
tell me, will love hym moost %

43 Simon answered and sayde, I sup-
pose, that he to whom he forgave moost.
And he sayde vnto him, Thou hast
truely iudged.

44 And he turned to the woman, and
sayde vnto Simon, Scist thou thys wo-
man ?
I entred into thy housse, and
thou gavest me noo water to my fete ;
]>utt she hath wcsshte my fotc
witli
teares, and wiped them witli tlic hecrcs
of her heed,
45 Tiiou gavest me no kysse; but she,
scncc the tynie I cam in, hath not
ceased to kysse my fete.

46 Mync liced with oyle thou didcsfc
nott anoyntc ; and she liatii annoynLed
my fete; with oyntnicnt.
47 \\'hercfore I suyc vnto the, many

3-20

OOTTITC, 360.

waurliteis izos jjos inanai,'ons, unte fny(Klji

filii ;

i]>

jjuiiiinc'i

Icitil

fnilctada,

Icitil

friyod.

48 Qa})uli |>an du izai, Afletauda |)us

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

mancga sinna forg}fcnc, forttam heo me
swyclc lufodc ; husse lufaj), dam etc hussc
forgyfen ys.

48 Da cvfse\> he to hyre, De synd dhie

frawaurlitcis ))ciiios.

synna forgj'fene.

49 Yali du;,aiiinun, j>ai mij)anakumb-
yandans, qi|>an in sis silbam, Whas sa
ist saei frawaurhtius afletai 1

49 Da bcgunnon, da de dar sac ton,
betwux him cwedan, Hwa)t is des de
manna S}Tina forgyfj) ]

50 i\> 'is qa}j jjan du jjizai qinon, Ga-
g^^So ^^

laubeins jjciiia gauasida j)uk ;
ga\vair|)i.

50 Dii cw3e|> he to dam wife. Din ge-

leafa de dyde hale ; gu nil on sybbe.

Chap. VIIT.

i Yah war]) bi})C afar
Jjata, ei yah "is wratoda and baurgs yah
haimos, mcryands yali
wailaspillonds
|)iii(laugardya Gujjs, yah })ai twalib mi])
imma ;

2 Yah qiiions |>ozci wcsun galcikinodos
alunaiie ubilaizc yah saulite, yah Marya,
sei haitana was Magdalene, us J)izaiei
iisiddycdun unliul})ons sibun,

3 Yah lolianna, (^ens Kusins,

faur-
agagyins Herodes, yah Susanna, yah
an})aros manages, J)Ozci andbahtedcdun
im us ai<i:inam seinaim.

4 Gaqumanaim \>im liiumam managaim,
yah jjaini Jjaiei us baurgim gaiddycdun
du imma, qaj) j^airh gayukon,

5 Urrann saiands du saian fraiwa sein-
amma.
saiso, sum ga-
draus faur wig, yali gatrudan war]), yah
fugh)s himinis IVetuu |)ata.

Yah mi|>|)anei

6 Yali an})ar gadraus ana staina, yah
uskiyaiiata ga|)aursnoda, in })izei ni hab-
aida qrammi)>a.

7 Yah sum gadraus in midumai j'aurn-
iwc, yah mijmskcinandans ))ai )>aurnyus
afwhaj)idcdun |)ata.

8 Yah an|nir gadraus ana air})ai godai,
yah uskcinoda, yah tawida akran taih-
iintaihundfal)).
uf-
W()])ida, Saci habai ausona du Imusyan,
gahausyai.

pata |)an

(|i|)ands

Chap. VIII.

i Syddan wjts

ge-
worden, daet he ferde |)urh da ceastre
and divt castel, Godes rice prediciende
and bodiende, and hig twclfe mid him ;

2 And sumo wif de wieron gcha^lede
of awyrgdum gastum and uiitrumnes-
sum, seo Magdaleuisce Maria, of daere
seofen deoflu ut-eodon,

3 And lohanna, Chuzan wif, Herodes
gerefan, and Susanna, and manega odrc,
de him of hyra spedum jjenedon.

4 S6|?lice da mycel menegco com, and
of dam ceastrura to him efstun, he Sitde
him an bigspel,

5 Sum man liis ssed seow.
Da he doet
seow, sum feoU wid done weg, and
wearj) fortrcden, and heofoncs fugulas
hit frieton.

6 And sum feoll ofer divnc stan, and
forscranc, fordam de hit wa?tan

hit
mefde.

7 And sum fcoll on da |iornas, and da

)>oriias .

.

. hyt for['rysmodon.

8 And sum feoll on gode eor|>an, and
worhte hundfealdne wa^stm. Da clyjiode
he and cwa)», Gehyre, se de earan
hajbbe.

9 Frclmn |)an ina siponyos is qi})an-

dans, wha siyai so gayuko.

10 Ij) is «|a)',

I /.wis atgiban ist kuniian
runos }>iudiiiassaus Gu[)S ;
i|) |'aim an-
|>araim in gayukoni^ ei saiwhandans ui

9 Da ahsodon hine hys leorning-cniht-

as, hwiet djtt bigspel waere.

10 Da cwa^j) he, Eow is gcseald d.Tt
ge witou Godes rices gcryne ; and 6d-
rum on bigspel lura, da^t hi gesconde

;

;

VII. 48. -VIII. lo.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

321

manye synnes ben for5ouun to hire, for
sohe hath loued myche ;
sothli he to
whom is lesse for^ouun, loueth lesse.

48 Sothli Jhesu seide to hir, Synnes

synnes are forgeven her, because she
loved moche ; to whom lesse is forgeven,
the same doeth lesse love.

48 And he sayde vnto her. Thy synnes

ben for30uun to thee.

49 And thei that saten to gidere at the
mete, bigunne to seie with ynue iiem
silf, Who is this that also for3yueth
synnes 1

50 Forsothe he seidc to the womman,
Thi feith hath maad thee saf ; go thou
in pees.

are forgeven the.

49 And they that sate at meate wyth
hym, began to saye with in tliem selves,
Who is
this whycli forgeveth synnes
ahol

50 And he sayde to the woman. Thy

fayth hath saved the; goo in peace.

Chap. VIIL

i And it was don aftir-
ward, and Jhesu made iorney by citees
and castelis, prechinge and euangelys-
inge the rewme of God, and twelue with
him

2 And summe wymmen that weren
heelid of wickide spiritis and syknessis,
clepid Mawdeleyn, of
]Marie, that is
whom seuene deuelis wenten out,

3 And Jone, the wyf of Chuse, procu-
ratour of Eroude, and Susanne, and
manye othere, whiche mynystriden to
him of her riches.

4 Forsoth whanne ful moche cumpanye
can to gidere, and fro citees hastiden to
him, he seide by a liknesse,

5 He that so with, ^ede out for to
sowe his seed. And the while he sow-
ith, sum felde by sydis the weye, and
was defoulid, and briddis of the eyr
eeten it.

6 And another felde doun on a stoon,
and it sprungen vp dryede, for it hadde
not moisture.

7 And anothir

felde doun among
thornes, and the thornes sprungen vp
to i'idere stran^'lidcn it.

8 And another felde doun in to good
erthe, and it sprungun vp made an Imn-
drid foold fruit. He seyingc thes thingis
criede, He that liath ceii.s of hceringe,
jiecre he.

9 Sothli his disciplis axiden him, what

this ])arable was.

10 To whiche he scyde, To 50U it

is
vniun to knowc the mystcrie of the
kyiigdom of God ;
forsothe to othere

Chap. VIII.

i And it fortuned after
that, he hym silfe went troughout cities
and tonnes, preachyuge and shewinge
the kyngdom of God, and the twelve
with hym

2 And also certayne wemen whych
wer healed of vnclene spretes and in-
firmittes, Mary, called Magdalen, out of
whom went seven devyls,

3 And Joanna, the wyfe of Chusa,
Herodes stewarde, and Susanna, and
many other, which ministred vnto hym
of their substaunce.

4 When moch people wer gadred to
gether, and were cOme to him out of
the cities, he spake by a similitude,
5 A sower went out to sowe his seede.
And as he sowed, some fell by the waye
syde, and hit was troden vnder fete, and
the foules of the ayre devoured it vp.

6 And some fell on ston, and as sone
as yt was spronge vp yt widdred awaye,
because yt lacked moystnes.

7 And some fell amonge thornes, and
the thornes spronge vp with it and
choked it.

8 And some fell on goode grounde, and
spronge vp and bare frute an hondred
And as he sayde these thynges
foolde.
he crycd, He that hath cares to heare,
lett hym heare.

9 llys disci])les axed hym, sayingc,

what nianer Hiinilitude this shulde be.

10 And he sayde, Vnto you is it geven
to knowe the secretes of the kyngdom
of God ;
butt to other in similitudes,

Y

7

322

1

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

gasaiwluiina, yah gahausyaiulaiis iii fra])-
yaiiia.

gcseon,

ne
gyton.

and

gehyrende

ne

on-

11 A))))an jjata

'ist so gayuko.

pata

1

Sol^hce dis is da;t bigspell.

Doet

fraiw ist waurd Gujjs ;

12 \\)

)nii wijn'a wig, sind ]>ai haus-
qiini|> diabulus, yah
yaiulaiis ;
iisiiinii|) J)ata waurd at' hairtiu ize, ei
galaubyaudaus ni ganisaina.

))a))roli

13 1]) })ai aua j^anima staina, "ize {^an
liausyaiid, ini[) faheidai andnimand jjata
Yah ]jai waurtins ni liaband ;
waurd.
|)aiei du inehi galaubyand, yah in mela
fraistubnyos afstandaud.

14 Ijj })ata 'in J>aurnuns gadriusando,
J)ai sind ]?aiei gahausyandans, yah af
saurgom, yah gabein, yah gabauryojjum
J)Izos libainais gaggandans afwhapnand,
yah ni gawiisqand.

jmi 'ize

15 1}) Jjata ana })izai godon air|)ai, |>ai
'in hairtin godamnia yah
sind,
selyamnia, gahausyandans })ata wanid
galiabaud, yah akran bairand "in
ainai.

])ul-

saed ys Godes word ;

12 Da d^ synd wid diene weg, daet
synd da de gehyraj) ; syddan se deofol
cym}>, and ajt-bryt diut word of liyra
heortan, d?et hig j>urh done geleafan
hale ne gcweord<»n.

13 Da de synd ofer da?ne stan, .
And
da doet word mid gefean onfo]?.
da nabba]> wyrtruman ; fordam de hi
liwilum gelyfa}>, and awaciaj) on diere
costnunj^e timan.

.

.

14 Doet ssed de fcoll on da Jjornas,
djiet synd da de gehyraj), and of carum,
and of welum, and of lustum dyscs Hfes
synd forjjrysmede, and naune waestm ne
bringa}).

15 Da3t feoll on da godan eorj^an, d»Tt
synd, da de on godre and on selestre
heortan, gehyrende doet word healdaji,
and wa}stm on ge)»ylde bringaj).

16 A})|:)an ni manna hikarn tandyands
dishulyij) 'ita kasa, ai])j)au uf ligr ga-
satyi}), ak ana lukarnastajjin satyij>, ei
|)ai 'inngaggandans saiwhaina liuhad.

16 Ne ofer-wrili}> nan man mid frete
his on-aelede leolit-fict, odde under bed
aset, ac ofer candel-stoef aset, daet da
in-gangendan leoht geseon.

Ni auk 'ist analaugn, Jjatei swikun|>
1
wair|5ai, nih
ni
ga-
kunnaidau, yah in swekunj^anima qimai.

fulgin,

fatei

ni

17 S6j)lice nis nan jnng digle, doet ne
sy geswiitelod, ne behydd, diet ne sy
cuj?, and open.

18 Saiwhij) nu, whaiwa liauseij? ; unte
Baei habaijj gibada innna, yah saei ni
habai|>, yah J)atci ])ugkcij> haban, afnini-
ada af imnia.

18 Warniaji, hu gc gehyran ; dam byj)
geseakl de ha'f|>, and swa hwylc swa
iuef)>, da^t he wenc dait he hiebbe, him
byj) ufyiTcd.

19 At'iddycdun |>an du 'imma ai|)ei yah
brol^ryus 'is; yah ni mahtedun andciijan
"imma faura managcin.

20 Yali gataihan warjj imma, J^atoi
ai|)ei j^eina yah bro})ryus jjcinai standand
uta, gasaiwiian ))uk gairnyandoiia.

21 1|) is audhalyands (|a|) du ini, Ai|>ci
meina yah brojiryus mcinai })ai sind, jiai
waurd GuJ>s gahausyandans, yah tau-
yandans.

19 His modor and his gebrodru hira
to comon ; and hi ne mihton hiiie for
divre manegu genoosian.

20 Da was him gecyded, Din modor
and dine gebrodru stancUiJ? her ute,
wyllaj) de goseon.

21 Da cwa'}) lie to him, Min modor
and mine gebrodru synd da, de ge-
l)yra)>, and do}) Godes word.

22 Warj) |>an

"in ainamma |)izc dngc,
yah 'is gahiij) in ski]) yah siponyos 'is.

22 Sc))lice anum da'ge woes geworden,
dii he on scyp code and his leorning-

5
8
9
3
2

3

VIIT. 11-22.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1K26:

323

men in parablis, that thei seynge se not,
and thei heeringe vndirstonde not.

that when tliey se they shulde nott se,
and when they heare they shulde not
vnderstonde.

11 Sothli this is the parable.

The

11 The similitude is this.

seed is Goddis word ;

ys the worde of God ;

The seede

1

Sothli thei that hen bisydis the weye,
ben thes that heeren ;
aftirward the
fend Cometh, and takith awey the word
fro her herte, lest thei bileuynge be
maad saaf.

1

Forwhi thei that felden doun on a
stoon, ben these men whiche whenne
thei han herd, receyuen the word with
ioye. And thes han not roote; for at a
tyme thei bileuen, and in tyme of temp-
tacioun thei gon awey.

14 Forsothe thes that felden doun in
thornes, ben thes that herden, and of
bysinessis, and richessis, and lustis of lyf
thei goynge ben stranglid, and bryngen
not a3ein fruyt.

1

Forsoth this that felde doun in to
good erthe, ben thes men whiche, in
good herte and best, heeringe the word
lioldun, and bryngen forth
fruyt in
pacience.

16 Forsoth no man H3tinge a lanterne
liilith it with a vessel, ethir puttith vndir
a bed, but on a candilsticke, that men
entringe se li3t.

17 Forsoth no thing is priuey, which
schal not be openyd, neither hid, whicli
Bchal. not be knowun, and come into
apert.

1

Therfore se ^e, hou ^e heeren ; for-
sothe it schal be 3ouun to him that
liath, and who euere hath not, also this
lie gessith him silf to liaue, schal be
takun awey fro him.

1

Forsoth his raodir and brithercn
camen to him ; and thei my3ten not go
fully to him for the cumpany of peplc.

20 And it is told to him, Tlii modir
and thi brithercn stondcn with outc
forth, willinge to se thee.

21 Wiiich answeringe scidc to hem,
^fy modcr and my brithercn ben thes,
wiiichc heeren tlic word of God, and
don.

12 Thoose that are besyde the waye,
are they that heare ; and afterwarde
commeth the devyll, and taketh awaye
the worde out of their hertes, lest they
shulde beleve and be saved.

1

They on the stonnes, are they which
when they heare the worde, receave yt
And these have noo rotes ;
with ioye.
which for a whyle beleve, and in tyme
of temtacion goo awaye.

14 That whicli fell amonge thornes,
are they which heare, and goo forth and
are choked with care, and riches, and
voluptrous livyuge, and brynge forth
noo frute.

15 That in the good grounde, ar they
which, with a goode and pure hert, heare
the worde and kepe it, and brynge forth
frute with pacience.

16 No man lyghteth a candell and
coverit hyt vnder a vessell, nether putt-
eth hit vnder the table, but setteth it
on a candelsticke, that they that enter
in maye se lyght.

17 Noo thinge is in secret, that shall
nott come abroode, nether eny thinge
hyd, that shall not be knowen, and
come to light.

18 Take hcde therfore, how ye heare ;
for whosoever hath to him shalbe geven,
and whosoever hath not, from hym shalbe
taken, even that same whiche he sup-
poseth that he hath.

19 Then cam to hym hys mother and
his brethren ; and coulde nott come at
hym for prcace.

20 And they tolde liym, sayingc, Thy
mother and thy brethren stonde wyth
out, and wolde se the.

21 He answered and sayd vnto them,
My Tiiother and my brethren are these,
which lieare the worde of God, and
do it.

22 Forsoth it was don in oon of daycs,
and he 8ti3ede in to a l>oot and liis dis-

22 Hit chaunsed on a certayne dayc,
that he went into a shippc and his dis-

V 2

324

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

Yali <|{i))
marisaiw.

(.lu ini, Galcij'iun liiiular J;ana

Yah gali|)Uii.

23 pariili, \mn swe farideclun, anasai-
slep. Yah atitUlya skura whidis 111 j^ana
marisaiw, yah gafulluodedun, yah birek-
yai waur})im.

24 Duatgacfgandans |>an iirraisidcdun
qi|>andans, Talzyand, fraqistnam.
i'lui,
1|) is urrcisands gasok wiiida, yali |)am-
11) a woga watiiis ; yah anashiwaideduu,
yah war]) wis.

25 Qa))

ga-

)\an du i'm, Wliar 1st
Ogaiidaiis |>aii

lauhcins izwara *?
sild-
aleikidedun, qi))andans du sis misso,
AVhas siai sa? ei yali wiiidam faurbiudij?
yah watuam, yah ufhausyand "imma.

ciiihtas.
seglian ofcr disnc mere.
ledon du.

Dii cwa^j) he to him, L'ton
And h'vf seg-

23 Da hig reowon, da slep he.

Dii

com windi yst,

and hig forhtodon.

24 Da gcnealaehton hig him to, and
cwaedon, Hlaford, we forweorttaj). Da
aras he and })reade dsene wind, and
dues wietercs hreohnesse ; da gcswac se
wind, and wear]? mycel smyltnes.

se

25 Da cwiej?

Haelcnd, Hwar is
eower geleafa ? Da adredon hig and
wundredon, and betwux him cwaedon,
Wenst du, liwset is des 1 da?t he bebyt
ge windum ge sse, and hig him hyr-
suniia)j.

26 Yah atfaridedun

in gawi Gad-

26 Da reowon hig to Gcrasenorum

darene, }>atei I'st wij)rawair}) Galcihxia.

rice, div;t is foran ongen Galileam.

27 Usgaggandin Jjan 'imma ana airjja,
gamotida "ininia wair sums us baurg,
saei habai(hi unhuljions nieUi higga, yah
wastyom iii gawasi}'S was, yah in garda
ni gawas, ak 'in hlaiwasnom.

|)an

28 Gasaiwliands

lesu, yah uf-
hropyands draus du imma, yah stibnai
mikilai qa)>, Wha mis yah }?us,
lesu,
Bidya ))uk, ni
sunau Gul's liauhistius ?
bahvyais mis.

29 Unte anabaud alnnin |'amma un-
lirainyin, usgaggau at" j^amma maun,
^fanag auk inel frawalw ina, yah bund-
ans was cisaniabandyom yali fotuband-
yom fastaiJ)S
yali, dishniupands
)n)s l)andyos, draibijjs was fram jjamma
unhul|'in ana auj'idos.

was,

30 Frail

I

ist
unte unhul|)ons managos gali|)un

an ina Icsus, (pl^ands, Wha
paruh (|a)), Haryis ;
in

iianio \nm\ ?

'ina.

27 Da he to lande com, him agen-arn
sum man .
, se hsefde deofol-seocncsse
Jange tide, and na?3 mid nanum reafe
gescryd, and ne mihte on hiise ge-
wunian, ac on byrgenu>n.

.

.

28 Da he geseah da?ne Haelcnd, he
astrehte hyne toforan him, and c\\s}\>
mycelre stefne hrymende, Hwn?t is me
and de, la Ilaelcnd, da^s hehstan Godcs
sunu ?
Ic halbige de, da^t dii ne |)reage
me.

29 Da bead he dam unclaenan gaste,
da't he of dam men fcrde.
Suj'lice
lange tide he hine gegrap, and be wa}s
mid raccntcagum gcbiindcn and mid
fot-copsum gchcaldcn, and, toborstonum
benduni, he wa}s fram deofle on wcsten
gelaed.

30 Da ahsode se Ha?lend hine, Ilwat
is din nama?
he, Lcgio,
da^t is on lire gc|'Code, Eorcd ; fordam
dc mancga dcoflu on liyne eodon.

Da cwa^|>

31 Yah bad ina, ei ni auabudi im, in

31 })a banlon hig hine, daet he Imii ne

afgrundijni galcij)an.

bude, dxt hi on grund ne bescuton.

32 Wasuji-jian yainar hairda sweinc
managaizc haldanaize in |)amma fair-
gunya, yah bt'diin ina, ci uslaubidcdi im
'in |;o gak'i|)an.

Yah usiaubida im.

32 And dar w»9 mycel lieord swyna
on dam nuinte hvsiendra, da bipdon hy,
Da lyfde
da^t he lyfdc him ou da gan.
he him.

1

VIII. 23-32.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

ciplis. And he seitli to liem, Passe we
And thei
oner the stondinofe watir.
sti3eden vp.

23 Sothli, hem rowynge, he slepte.
And a tempest of wynd cam doun in to
the watir, and thei weren driuen hidur
and thidur with wawis, and weren in
per el.

24 Forsothe thei comynge ny5 reysiden
him, seyinge, Comaundour, we perischen.
And he risynge blamyde the wynd, and
the tempest of watir; and it ceesside,
and pesyblete was maad.

feith?

25 Forsoth he seyde to hem, Where is
Whiche dredinge won-
5oure
driden, seyinge to gidere, Who, gessist
for he comaundith to
thou, is this?
wyndis and to the see, and thei obeyen
to him.

26 And thei rowiden to tlie cuntree of

Gerasenus, which is a3ens Galilee.

27 And whanne he wente out to the
lond, sum man ran to him .
, which
hadde a deuyl now longe tymes, and was
not cloth id with cloth, neither dwellide
in hous, but in sepulcris.

.

.

28 This as he sy3 Jhesu, felde doun
bifore him, and criynge with greet voys
seide, What to me and to thee, Jhesu,
the sone of God the hi3este ?
I beseche
thee, that thou turmente not me.

TYNDALE, 1526.

325
ciples alsoo. And he sayde vnto them,
Lett vs goo over vnto the other syde of
the lake. And they lanched forthe.

23 And, as they sayled, he fell a slepe.
And there arose a storme of wynde in
the lake, and they wer fylled with water,
and wer in ieopardy.

24 And they Avent to hym and awoke
hym, sayinge, Master, master, we are
loost. He arose and rebuked the wynde,
and the tempest off water ; and they
ceased, and it wexed calme.

25 And he sayd vnto them, Where is
youre fayth 1 They feared and wondred,
sayinge one to another. Who is this ?
for he commaundeth windes and water,
and they obey him.

26 And they sayled vnto the region of
the Gaderens, which is over agaynst
Galile.

27 As he went out off the shippe to
londe, there met hym a certayne man
out off the cite, whych had a devyll
longe tyme, and ware noo clothes, nether
aboode in eny housse, but amonge graves.
28 When he sawe Jesus, he cryed, and
fell doune before hym, and with a loude
voyce sayde. What have I to do wyth
Jesus, the sonne off the moost
the,
Hyest 1 I beseche the, torment me noot.

29 Sothli he comaundide to the vnclene
spirit, that he schulde go out fro the
Forsothe he took him longe
man.
stockis was
tymes, and he kept
bounden with chaynes, and, the boondis
broken, he was led of fendis in desert.

in

29 For he commaunded the
foule
For
sprete, to come out of the man.
ofte tymes he caught hym, and he was
bounde with chaynes and kept with
fetters, and he brake the bondcs, and
was caryed of the fende into wildcrncs.

30 Sothli Jhesu axide him, seyinge,
. What name is to thee ? And he seyde,
A Icgioun ;
for manyc fendis hadde
entrid in to him.

3

And thei preiden

him, that he
Bchuldc not comuundc liem, that thei
Bchulden go in to the depncssc.

32 Forsothe a flok of iiianyc lioggis
was there Icsewyngc in an hil, and thei
preicden him, that he Hchuldc suH'rc hem
to cntre in to hem. And he sufl'ridc
hem.

30 Jesus axed hym, sayinge. What is
thy name 1 And he sayde, Legion ; be
cause many devyls wer entred into hym.

31 And thoy bosoni^ht hym, that he
woldc nott commaundc them, to goo
into the dcpe.

32 There was thcrby an lieerdc of mjuiy
swync feadyngc on an hill, and tlicy
prayed hym, tliat he woldc soffrc them
And he soffered
to enter into them.
them.

326

GOTHIC, 360.

33 UsgJi.^c^J^iHlans ))aii suns |>ai iinluil[)-
])0

aiis af
swcina ; yah rann so wri)5ns and driiison
in jjaiia iiiarisaiw, yali afwliapnodcdun.

j/anima inann, gali))Uii

in

34 Gasaiwhaiidans })an \rd\ huldaiidans
|)ata waiir|)ano, ga|)lauhun, yah gataihun
in baurg, yah in wcihsa.

35 Usiddycdun )>an saiwlian J)ata waur])-
Yah qenum at Icsua, yali biget-
auo.
un sitandan jvana mannan, af jiammei
unhul}5ons usuldyedun, gawasi(hma yah
lesuis ; yah
frajjyandan,
ohtedun.

faura futuui

36 Gataihun J^an "ini yah }nii gasaiwh-

andans, whaiwa ganas sa daimonaieis.

37 Yah bedun ina alLai gauyans ]nze
unte
Gaddarcne,
wcsun.
ajrisa niikihimma dishabaidai
I]) 'is galeijjands in skip gawandida sik.

galci])an

fairra

sis,

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

33 D.I codon big of dam men, on da
swyn ; da ferde seo heord myceium
racse on doene mere, and wcarj) dar
adruncen.
34 Da da hyrdas diet gesawon, da
flugon big, and cyddon on da ceastre,
and on tunum.

35 Dei codon big ut da^t big gesawon
Da comon hii;
diet dar geworden wa?s.
to dam lleelcnde, da fundon big da'ne
man, de deofol of eode, gcscrydnc, and
halum mode, oet
bis fotum ; and big
adredon him.

36 Da cyddon him da dc gcslwon, hii

he wa^s hal gewordcn of dam eorcde.

37 Da bfcd bync call mcncgo da^s rices
Gcrascnorum, da3t he fram him gcwitc,
fordam big myceium ege geba?fte wa?r-
on.

Da wende he on scype agen.

38 V)(i]> |>an ina sa wair, af jnimmei |)0S
unhul])ons usuhlycdun, ei wcsi nii|> im-
ma.

FraUiilot j)an ina lesus, qijands,

39 Gawandei |)uk du garda |)oinamma,
yali usspillo whan filu gatawida j)U3
Yah gahiij) and baurg alhi, mer-
Gu|?.
yands, whan filu gatawida imma lesus.

38 Da l)ned byne se man, de se deofol
Da
of code, da't he mid him wunede.
forlet se Ha^lend byne, and cwa^}) to
him,
39 Wend to dinum Imse, and c\\> hu
Da ferde
mycel de God gcdoii ba^fj).
be into call da ceastre, and cyddc hii
mycel se Haelend him gedon ha?fde.^

40 "War)) |)an, mi|)|\'inci gawandida sik
lesus, anchiani ina managci ; wesun auk
alhii bcidandans is.

40 S6|;lice wn?s gewordcn, da sc TTa'l-
end au^en-com, seo manegco bine onfcng;
calle big gcbidon his.

41 Yah sai ! qam wair, jiizei nanio
faurama))lois swnagogais
yali, driusands faura fotuin le-

lacirus,
was ;
suis, bad ina gaggan in gard scinana,

sah

42 Unto dauhtar ainoho was ininia
swo wintriwe twalibo, yah so
swalt.
Mi|)|^aiici I'aii iddya is, nianagcins })iaih-
un ina.

twalif,

43 Yah f|ino wisandei in runa blo|>is
yera
fraqani
allanima aii^ina seinaninia, yah ni niahta
was frani ainonichun galeikinon,

Ickyans

soci

in

44 Atgaggandci du aftaro,

attaitok
Bkauta wastyos is, yah suns gasto|> sa
runs blobis izos.

41 And d.i com on man, da^s nama
wa'S lairus, se wa33 da?re gcsamnunge
feoll he to da^s Hjclcndes
ealdor ;
fctuni, and ba^d liync, da?t he ferde to
bys biisc,

d:i

42 Fordam he brefde ane dohtor nean
twclf wintrc, and seo forj^fcrdc. Da j^^c-
byredc byt, dji he ferde, of dam men-
egum he wa^s of-J>rungen.
43 Da wa^s sum wif on blod-ryne
twclf gcr, SCO for-da?lde on Itccas call
dat bco ahte, and ne milite dcah of
a'ncgum beon gcbicled,

44 Da gcncahclite bco wida?ftan, and
a^t-bran bys rcafcs fua^d, da set-stod sona
da's blodcs ryne.

VIII. 33-44-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

327

33 Therfore fendis wenten out fro the
man, and entride in to hoggis ; and
with hire the floe wente hedlinge in to
the lake of watir, and was stranglid.

34 Which thing, as thei that lesewiden
sy3en don, thei fledden, and tolden in to
the citee, and in townes.

35 Sothli thei 3eden out to se that thing
. And thei founden the
that was don. .
man sittinge clothid, fro whom the fendis
wenten out, and in hool mynde at his
feet j and thei dredden.

.

36 Sothli and thei that sy5en tolden
to hem, how he was maad hool of the
legioun.
37 And al the multitude of the cun-
tree of Gerasenus preieden him, that he
schulde go fro hem, for thei weren holde
Sothli he sti3ynge in
with greet drede.
to a boot turned a3ein.

38 And the man of whom the fendis
wente out, preied him, that he schulde
Sothli Jhesu lefte him,
be with him.
seyinge,

39 Go a^eyn in to thin hous, and telle
hou grete thingis God hath don to thee.
And he wente thorw al the citee, prech-
inge, hou grete thingis Jhesu hadde
don to him.

40 Forsothe it was don, whanne Jhesu
hadde gon a3eyn, the cumpanye of pcple
receyuede him ;
alle weren
abidinge him.

forsothe

41 And loo ! a man, to whom the name
V)a8 Jayrus, and he was a prince of a
syimjroire ; and he fel doun to the feet
of Jliesu, prciynge bin), that he schulde
entrc in to his hous,

42 For olypi dou3tir was to him al-
moost of twcluc 3eer, and tliis deicdc.
And it bifel, tlie while lie wente, he was
throngun of t^ic cum[)eny.
43 And sum womman was in flix of
blood
liaddc
Bpendid al hir catel in to Iccliis, nether
my3tn be curid of ony,

3cer, which

fro twcluo

44 Cam ny3 bihyndc, and toucliidc the
liem of his clooth, and a non the flix of
hir blood stood.

33 Then went the devyls out off" the
man, and entred into the swyne ; and
the heerd toke their course and ran
heedlynge into the lake, and wer choked.
34 When the herdmen sawe what had
chaunsed, they fleed, and tolde it in the
cite, and in the villages.
35 And they cam out to se what was
And cam to Jesus, and founde
done.
the man, out of whom the devyls wer
departed, sittynge att the fete of Jesus
clothed, and in hys right mynde ; and
they wer afrayde.

36 They also which sawe it tolde them,
by what meanes he that was possessed
of the devyll was healed.
37 And all the whole multitude of the
Gadarens besought hym, that he wolde
departe from them, for they wer taken
And he gate hym
with greate feare.
into the shyppe and returned backe
agayne.

38 The man out off" whom the devyls
were departed, besought hym, that he
myght be with hym.
But Jesus sent
hym awaye. sayinge,

39 Goo home agayne into thyne awne
housse, and shewe what thynges God
And he went his
hath done to the.
waye, and preached thorowe out all the
cite, what thynges Jesus had done vnto
hym.

40 Hit fortuned, that when Jesus was
come agayne, the people receaved hym ;
for they all longed for hym.

41 And beholde ! there cam a man,
named Jairus, and he was a ruler off
the sinaGfojre ; and he fell doune at
Jesus fete, and besought hym, that he
wolde come into his housse,

42 Ffor he had but a doughtcr only
of twelve yerc of age, and she Inye a
dyingc. As he went, the people throngo
hym.
43 And a woman havynge an issue of
])lou(l twelve yercs, whiche had spent all
her substannce amoiigo phisicions, nether
couldc be li()li)cn of eny,
44 Gum bchinde hym, and touched tho
hem of his garment, and immediatly her
issue off blond Htaunchcd.

328

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

LauL^nyandam ))an allaim,

45 Yah qa|? Icsus, Wlias sa tckands
mis?
qa|>
Paitrus, yah |)ai mi}) imma, Talzyand,
maiiai^cins biwliairbatid })iik, yah jjreih-
aud, yah ([\\>'\s, AV'has sa tckands mis 1

46 paruh "is qaj), Taitok mis sums, ik
auk ufkuii|)a maht usgaggandeiu af mis.

47 Gasaiwhandei J^an so qino, j^atci ni
gahiuguida, rcirandei, yah atdriusandei
du imma, in jjizei attaitok innna gataih
imma "in andwairjiya allaizos manageins,
yah whaiwa gahailuoda suns.

48 I|) lesus qa}> du izai, prafstei ]>uk,
dauhtar, gahmbeins |;eina ganasida |>uk ;
gagg in gawairjjya.

49 Nauh})an imma rodyandin, gaggi|>
sums mannc fram |)is fauramajjlcis swn-
agogeis, qi}?ands du imma, patei ga-
dau)?noda dauhtar Jjeina, ni draibei Jjana

hiisari.
50 1]>

is gahausyands, andliof imma
qi))ands, Ni faurhtei, j^atainei galaubei,
yah ganasyada.

51 Qimands J^an in garda, ni fralailot
Paitru yah
ainohun inngaggan, alya
iakobu yah lohanncn, yah })ana attau
Jjizos mauyos yah aij^ein.

52 Gaigrotun ]>an alhii, yah faiflokun
paruh (ja}), Ni grctij), unte ni ga-

|)0.
swalt, ak slcpi['.

53 Yah bihlolum ina, gasaiwhandans

J)atei gas wait.

54 panuh IS usdrcibands allans ut, yah
fairgrcipands handu izos wopida, qijj-
ands, Mawi, urrcis.

55 Yah gawandida ahman izos, yah
Yah anabaud izai giban

ust()}> suns.
mat.

56 Yah usgeisnodcdun fadroin izos ;
ij) is faurbaud im, ci mann ni qijjciua
)>ata waurj)ano.

45 Da cwa^|) se Haelend, IIwa?t is so
de mc a}t-hran 1 Da In'g ealle aet-socon,
da cwa?)) Petrus, and da de mid him
w?eron, Eala lilaford, das mcnegeo de
J>ringa|), and geswcncaj), and dii scgst,
Hwa ait-hnin me 1
46 Da cwai|> he. Sum me a^t-hran, ic

wiste dait ma-gen of me eode.

47 Da da^t wif geseah, daet hit liim
nces dyrnc, heo com forht, and fistrehtc
hig to liis fotum, and geswutelode be-
foran callum folce for hwylcum j^inge
heo hine ait-hran, and hii heo wearj)
sona hal.

48 Da ew?e|) he to h}Te, Dohtor,

.

.

. din geleafa de hule gedyde ; ga nu

on sybbe.

49 Him da gyt sprecendum, da com
sum man to diere iresamnunjre eahh*e,
and cwa*]) to liim,^[Dyu dohtor ys dead,]
ne drece du hyne.

50 Da se Hselend daet word gehyrde,
he andswarode dses maedenes feeder, Ne
ondrjicd dii dC; gelyf witodHce, and heo
bi|> hii.

51 And da da he to dam huse com, ne
let he niinne mid him in-gan, buton
Pctrum and lohanncm and lacobum,
and dses maedenes fivder and
hyre
modor.

52 Da weopon hig ealle, and heofodou
Da cwioj) he, Ne wcpe ge, s6|)lice

hi.
nis dis maeden dead, ac heo slivp}>.
53 Da tccldon hig hyne, and wiston
dcTt heo dead wa'S.

54 .

.

.

. Da nam he hyre hand,

and cw»|), Maeden, de ic secge, aris.

55 Da gehwearf h}Te gast iigen, and
heo sona aras. And he hct hyre syllan
etan.

56 Da wundrcdon hyre magas ; da
l)ead he dam, da't hi hit nanum men ne
sacdon djet dar gcdon wa^s.

Chap. IX.

j>ans
twalif apaustauluns, atgaf im maht yah

i Galiaitands |>an

Chap. IX.

^i Da clypodc he to-
gnedcre his twclf apostolas, and sealde

VIII. 45--IX. i.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

329

45 And Jhesii seitb,\Yho is it that toucli-
ide me 1 Sothli alle men denyinge, Petre
seide, and thei that weren with him,
Comaundour, cumpanyes thringen, and
turmentyn thee, and thou seist, Who
touchide me ?

46 And Jhesus seide, Sum man touch-
ide me, forwhi and I haue knowe vertu
to haue gon out of me.
47 Sothly the womman seynge, for it
was not priuey, sche trembhnge cam,
and felde doun bifore his feet, and for
what cause sche hadde touchid him sche
schewide b}^ore al the peple, and hou a
non sche was heelid.

48 And he seide to hir, Dou^tir, ....
thi feith hath maad thee saaf ; go thou
in pees.
49 3it him spekinge, sum man cam to
the prince of the synagoge, seyinge to
him, For thi dou5tir is deed, nyle thou
trauaile the.maystir

50 Sothli this word herd, Jhesu an-
sweride to the fadir of the damysele,
Nyle thou drede, but oonly bileue thou,
and sche shal be saaf.

51 And whanne he had come to the
hous, he suffride not ony man for to
entre with him, no but Petre and John
and James, and the fadir and the modir
of the damysele.

52 Sothli alle wepten, and biwaylcden
hir. And he seide, Nyle ^e wepe, sothli
the damysele is not deed, but slepith.

53 And thei scorniden him, witinge

for sche was deed.
54 ... . Forsothe he holdinge hir
hond criede, seyinge, Damysel, ryse vp.

55 And hir spirit turnydc a^eyn, and
And he comaundidc to

Bche roos anon.
^iue to hir for to etc.

56 And hir fadir and modir wondridcn
gretly ; to wliiche he coinaundide, that
thei schuldcn not seye to ony man the
thing that was don.

45 And Jesus sayde, Who is

it that
touched me ? When every man denyed,
Peter and they that were with hym
sayde. Master, the people thrust the,
and vexe the, and thou sayest. Who
touched me ?

46 And Jesus sayd, Some boody touched
me, for I perceave that vertue is gone
out of me.
47 When the woman sawe, that she
was not hid from hym, she cam trim-
blynge, and fell at his fete, and tolde
hym before all the people for what cause
she had touched hym, and howe she
was healed imraediatly.

48 And he sayde vnto her, Doughter,
be of goode comforte, thy fayth hath
made the safe ; goo in peace.

49 Whyll he yett speake, there cam
won from the rulers off the synagogis
housse, which sayde to hym, Thy doughter
is deed, disease not the master.

50 When Jesus herde that, he answered
to the maydens father sayinge, Feare
nott, beleve only, and she shalbe made
waole.

51 And when he cam to the housse, he
suffred no man to goo in with hym,
save Peter James and Jhon, and the
father and the mother of the niayden.

52 Every body weept, and sorowed for
her. And he sayde, Wepe nott, for she
is nott deed, butt slepeth.

53 And they lewgh hym to scornc, for
they knew thatt she was deed.

54 And he thrust them all out att the
dores, and caught her by the honde and
cryed, sayinge, Mayde, aryse.

55 And her sprete cam agayne, and
she roose strayght waye. And he com-
maundcd to geve her meatc.

56 And the father and the mother of
licr were astonycd ; but lie warned, tliatt
tell noo man whatt was
they sliulde
done.

Chap. TX.

i ForHothe tweluc apo-
Btlis clepid to giderc, Jlicsu 3af to hem

Chap. IX.

1 Then called he the .xij.
together, and gave them power and

;

2
1

;

330

GOTHIC, 360.

AXGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

waldufiii

ufar

allaiiu

unliul|'om, yah

saiilitins galiailyan.

2 Yah insaiulida 'ins meryan )?iuclan-
gartlya Gu])S, yah gahailyan allans jjans
unhailans.

3 Yali qa|j (lu im, Ni waiht niniaij) 'in
wig, nili waluns, nih matibalg, nih hlaib,
nili skattaus, nih j^an tweilinos paidos
haban,

4 Yah in

|)anci gard g'^vggai]?,

Jar

salyi|>, yah |)a))roh usgaggai)?.

him mihte and anwcald ofcr calle dcofol-
seocnessa, and ctset adla hi gehcvldon.

2 And he sende hig to bodianne Godes

rice, and untrume gehaelan.

3 Da cwa})) he to him, Ne nime ge
nrm })ing on wege, ne gyrdc, nc codd,
ne lilaf, ne feoh, ne ge nabbon twa
tuneean.

4 And on swa hwylc hus swa ge in-

ga|>, wunia|5 dar, cd ge ut-gan.

5 Yah swa managai swe ni andnimaina
baurg
izwis, usgaggandans
yainai yali niulda af fotum izwaraini
afliiisyaij) du weitwodi})ai ana ins.

|)izai

us

6 Usgaggandans jan,

|>airhid(lyc(hin
and l)ainios, wailamcryandans yah leik-
inondans and all.

7 Gahausida j^an Herodis, sa taitrarkcs,
\>o '\vaur))anona fram iinma alia, yah }>alita,
unte qcj^un sumai, Jjatci lohanues urrais
us daujjaim

8 Sumai ]>an qejnm Ilelias ataugida
sik ; suniaiu|)-}'an, })atei praufetus sums
})ize airizane ussto)>.

9 Yah qal> Herodes, lohannau ik haub-
i}) whas ist sa, bi J>anei ik
Yah sokida ina ga-

i}> afmaimait ;
liausya swalciki
saiwhan.

10 Yah gawandyandans

apau-
Btaulcis usspillododunimma, swa filu swe
Yah andniniands ins, af-
gatawidcdun.
iddya sundro ana sta]) aupyana baurgs,
nanmidaizos BaidsaiVdan.

sik

5 And swa hwjlce swa eow nc onfo}^,
ctonne ge of ctaere ceastre g;'}) .''isccaca}>
eowcr futa dust ofcr liig on witncsse.

6 Da ferdon hig }:urh

cla burhga,

bodiende and seghwar haclende.

7 Da gehyrde Herodes, se feorjan drclcs
rica, ealle da j>ing de be him wa?ron ge-
wordene, da tweonode him, fordam de
sume ScTedon,
divt lohannes of deaj^e
aras;

8 Sume sjvdon, doet Helins oet-y wde

sume, dset an eald witega aras.

9 Da cw.TJ) Herodes, lohanncm ic
beheafdode ; hw»t is des, be dam ic
dilc gehyre 1 Da smcade he da^t he
hine gesawe.

10 Da cyddon him da apostolas, swa
hwopt awa hig dydon. Da nam he hig,
and ferde 011-sundron on wcste stowe,
SCO is Bethsaida.

11 Ij) |h>s manageins fiii|)andeins, laist-
idedun afar iinma.
Yali andniniands
ins, rodida du ini
Jjo bi J)iudangardya
Gu|>s ; yah jians Jarbans leikinassaus
gahailida.

12 panuh dags yu|)an dugann linciwan,
atgngL^^andans jmn du ininia J^ai twalif
(l())un du iniina, Fralct j'O inanagein, vi
})os bisunyanc liaimos
galci|>andans in
yah wcihsa, salyaina, yah bugyaina sis
matins, unte her in auj'yanuna stada
sium.

13 panuh qa|) du im, Gibi|) im yus
matyan.
I|> lis ([c|uin du imnia, Xist
bindar uns maizo fimf hlaibam yah
fiskus
J-atei weis g»gg-

twai, iiiba |'aii

1

Da da menogo d.Tt wiston, da fili-
Da onfeng he hig, and
don hig him.
sprncc to liim be Godes rice ; and da he
gchaelde de lacnunga bejiorfton.^

1

Da gewat se da:»g for)\ and hig
twclfc him gencala-hton and sicdon him,
La?t das menego, djvt hig faron on d.Is
castelu and on d.Ts tiinas, de her abiitan
synd, and him mete findon, fordam de
we svnd her on wcstere stowe.

13 Da cwa*)) he to him, Sylle ge him
hig, We nabbaj?
ctan.
biiton fif hlafas and twcgen fixas, bilton
we gan, and us mete bicgon and eallum

D.i cwccdon

1

1

;

IX. 2-13.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

331

vertu and power on alle deuelis, and
that thei gphulde heele sykenessis.

2 And he sente hem for to preche the
kyngdom of God, and for to heele sjke
men.

3 And he seith to hem, Take 56 no
thing in the weye, nethir ^erd, nethir
scrippe, nethir breed, nethir money, and
nethir haue 56 twey cootis.

4 And in to what euere hous 5e schulen
entre, dwelle 30 there, and go 50 not out
thennis.

5 And who euere schulen not receyue
50W, 50 goynge out of that citee schake
of also the poudir of 5oure feete in to
witnessinge on hem.

6 Sothli thei gon out, cumpassiden bi
castels, euangelisinge and heelinge euere-
where.

7 Forsoth Eroude, the fourthe prince,
herde alle the thingis that weren don of
him, and he doutide, for that it was seid
of sum men, for Joon roos a^en fro
deede men ;
8 Forsoth of sum men, for Elye ap-
peride ; sothli of othere men, for oon of
the olde prophetis roos.

9 And Eroude seith, I haue bihedid
sothli who is this, of whom I
Joon ;
heere thes thingis] And he sou3te for
to se him.

10 And apostlis turn3rnge a3eyn toolden
to him, what euere thingis thei diden.
And hem takun to, he wente on an-
othere half in to desert place, which is
Bethsayda.

1

Which thing whanne the cumpanyes
hadden knowen, thei
folowiden him.
And he rcccyuyde hem, and si)ak to
hem of the kingdom of God ; and hcel-
ide hem that hadden ncde of cure.

12 Sothli the day bigan for to bowc
tweluc comynge ny^
doun, and the
seiden to him, Lccue the cumpanyes,
that thei goynge turne in to castels and
towncs, that ben abouto, that thei fyndc
for we ben here in a desert
mctin,

place.

auctorite over all devyls, and that they
myght heale diseases.

2 And he sent them to preache the

kyngdom of God, and to cure the sick.

3 And he sayd to them, Take noo
thinge to sucker you by the waye, nether
staffe, nor scripe, nether breed, nether
money, nether have two cootes.

4 And watsoever housse ye enter into,

there abyde, and thence departe.

5 And whosoever will not receave you,
when ye departe from that citie shake
of the very dust from youre fete for a
testimony agaynst them.

6 They went forthe, and went thorowe
the tonnes, preachynge the gospell and
healynge every wheare.

7 Herod, the tetrarch, herde off all
thatt by hym was done, and douted,
because that it was sayd of some, that
Jhon was rysen agayne from deeth

8 And off some, that Helias had apered ;
and off other, that won off the olde pro-
phettes was rysen agayne.
9 And Herod sayde, Jhon have Y be-
hedded ; who is this, of whom I here
suche thynges ? And he desired to se
hym.

10 And the apostles retburned and
tolde hym, all that they had done. And
he toke them, and went a syde into a
solitary place, neye to a citie called Beth-
saida.

1

The people knewe off it, and fol ow-
And he rcceaved them, and
ed liym.
spake vnto them of the kyngdom off
God ; and healed them that had ncde
to be healed.

12 The dayc began to wxare awaye,
then cam the twelve and sayde vnto
hym, Sende the people awaye, that they
maye goo in to the tonnes and villages
roundabout, and lodge and get meatc,
for we are here in a place of wildernes.

13 Forsothe he seith to hem, 3yuc 30
And thei seiden, Tlier
to hem to etc.
ben not to vs more than fyue loouys
>'tnl twcyc fischis, no but pcruuenturc

13 Then sayde he vnto them, Geve yc
And tliey sayde. We liavo
them meatc.
no moo but five loves and two (isslies,
except we shuld goo, and bye meatc for

8

1

332

GOTHIC, 360.

AXGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

andans, bugyaima allai })izai nianaseidai
matins.

14 Wcsiin auk swc fiinf

))Usun(lyos
Qaj) [^aii du sipoiiyain sciiiaiin,
waire.
Gawaurkcijj 'im anakumljyaii kubituns,
ana wliaryanoli finiftiguns.

15 Yah gatawidudun swa,

yali ga-

dissum werede.

14 Dar wjcron ncah fif |)u*scnda wera.
Da cwjej? he to his leorning-cnihtum,
D6|) duet big sitton jjuili gebeorsc}'pas,
fiftigum.

15 And hig swl dydon, and hi calle

tawidedun anakunibyan allans.

saeton.

16 Niniands Jjan }'ans fimf lilaibans yah
twans fiskans, insaiwhands du hiniina,
'ins, yah gabrak, yah gaf
ga))iuj)ida
|)izai man-
siponyam, du faurhig}an
age! n.

17 Yah matidedun, yah sadai waurj^un
allai ; yah ushafan war|) jjatei aflifnoda
im gabruko, tainyons twalif.

16 Da nam he da fif hlafas and da
twegen fixas, and on done heofon be-
seah, and bletsode hig, and bnoe, and
his leorning-enihtum, diet big
daelde
asetton hig beforan dam mcnegum.

17 Da aeton hig ealle, and wurdon ge-
fyllede ; and man nam da gebrotu de
dar belifon, twclf cypan fuUe.

1

Yah warj), mij)|5anei was is bidyands
sundro, gamotidedun imma sij)onyos is,
yah fiah ins, qi|)ands, Whana mik qij)-
and wisan |?os manageins ?

19 Ijj eis andhafyandans, qc}>un, lo-
lianncn J)ana Daujtyand, anjiarai j^an He-
j^atci praufctus sums
Ician, suniai )-an,

])ize airizane ussto}\

20 Qa|> |)an du im, A|)|)an jais whana
mik qijHJ'
j)an
Paitnis qa}?, pu is Christus sunns Gu|is.
21 I}) is })an gawhotyands im faurbau|>

Andhafyands

"\visan ]

ei mann ni qijjcina j'ata,

18 Da wses geworden, da se Iljclend
wa-s ana bine gebiddende, hys leorning-
cnihtas waeron mid him, da uhsode he
big, Hw?et secgp dis folc da?t ic sy 1

19 Da andswarodon hig, and cwa'don,
lohauncm
Ileliam,
sume, diet sum witega of dam ealdum
aras.

Baptistam, snme

20 Da S8ede be him, Hwa't secge ge
Du andswarode Petrus, Dii

dirt ic sy ?
eart Crist Godes sunu.

2

Da )jreade he big and bead dxt big

bit nauum men ne sa?don,

22 Qij)an<ls, patci skal sunns mans
manag winnan, yah uskusans fram sin-
istam wairjmn, yah gudyam, yah bok-
aryam, yah usqiman, yah ))ridyiu daga
uneisan.

22 .

. Fordam de bit gcbyrc|) da^t
mannes sunu fela j'inga jioligc, and beo
aworpen fram ealdrum, and ealdor-man-
num, and fram boccrum, and beo of-
slagen, and |;riddan i]iV'^e arise.

23 Qiil> pan du allaim, Yal)ai whas
will afar mis gaggan, afaikai sik silban,
yah nimai galgan scinana dag whanoh,
yah laistyai mik.

24 Saei allis wili saiwala seina nnsyan,

fnupstcij)
saiwalai scinai in meiua, ganasyi)> ^0.

a|))nm

izai ;

saei

fraqisteijj

23 Da cwiej) be to eallum, Gyf bwa
wyle a}fter me cuman, a^tsace
liinc
sylfne, and nime liis cwylniinge, and
me folgige.

24 Se de wyle hys sawle hale gcdon,
w'todlice se de bis

se hig forspil}' ;
sawle for me forspil)>, he hi gehaele}).

25 "Who allis j>aurftc gatauyi{) sis man-
na, gageigands |'o manascd alia, i|) sis
silbin fnupstyands, ai|>))au gasleij'yands?

26 Saei allis skamai}> sik meina ai|>)mu
sunns mans
meinaize
skamaid sik. bij'C «pnii|) in wulj^u sein-

waurde, |Mzuh

25 llwa:t fremaj) acncgum men, dcah
be calnc middan-eard on acht begite, and
byne sylfne forspillc, and liys forw}Td
w^Tce 1

26 Se de me and mine spaeca forsyh}*,
done mannes sunu forsybj), donne be
cyinj> on bis ma^gen-j'rymme, and hys

4
8

IX. 14-26.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, inzG,

333

and we go, and byen metis in to al the
cum])any.

14 Sothli the men weren almoost fyue
Forsothe he seith to his
thousynde.
disciplis, Make hem to sitte to mete by
feestis, fyftyes.

15 And thei diden so, and thei maden

alle men sitte to the mete.

16 Forsothe fyue looues and tweye
fysches takun, he byheld in to heuene,
and blesside hem, and brak, and delide
to his disciplis, that thei schulden putte
bifore the cumpanyes.

17 And alle men eeten, and weren
fillid ; and this that lefte to hem of
broken metis was taken, twelue coffyns.

t8 And it was don, whanne he was
aloone preiynge, and his disciplis weren
with him, and he axide hem, seiynge.
Whom seyn the cumpanyes me to be "?

19 And thei answeriden, and seiden,
John Baptist,
seyen
Elye, but othere seyen, for o prophete
of the formere hath risun.

forsothe

othere

20 Sothli he seide to hem. But whom
seye 3e me to be ] Symound Petre an-
sweringe seide, The Crist of God.

21 And he blamynge hem comaundide
to no

schulden

seie

hem that thei
man,

22 And seith thes thingis, For it bi-
suffre manye
houeth mannis sone to
thingis, and to be repreued of the eldere
men, and of princes of prestis, and of
scribis, and for to be slayn, and in the
thridde day to ryse a3en.

23 Forsothe he seide to alle men, If
ony man wole come aftir me, denye he
him silf, and t.'ike he his cross cuery
day, and sue he me.

24 Sothli he that schal wilne to make
forvvhi he
his lyf saaf, schal leesc it ;
that schal lecse his lyf for me, schal
make it saaf.

25 Forsothe what profitith it to a man,
if he Wynne al the world, Kothli Icese
him silf, and do peyringe of him silf {

26 Forwhi who that schal schamc me
and my wordis, and mannis sone schal
schamc hi in, whanne he schal come in

all this people.

1

And they wer about a five thousand de
men.
disciples,
Cause them to sit doune by fyftie, in a
company.

He sayde vnto his

15 And they did soo, and made them

all sit doune.

16 He toke the five loves and the two
fisshes, and loked vp to heven, and blessed
them, and brake, and gave to his dis-
ciples, to sett before the people.

17 And they all ate, and wer satisfied ;
and there was taken vp off thatt re-
mayned to them, twelve baskettes full
off broken meate.

1

Hit fortuned, as he was alone pray-
inge, hys disciples were with hym, and
he axed them, sayinge. Who saye the
people that I am ?

19 They answered, and sayd, Jhon
Baptist, some saye Helias, and some
saye, won of the olde prophetes is risen
agayne.

20 He sayde vnto them. Who saye ye
Peter answered and sayde,

that I am %
Thou arte the Christ off God.

21 He warned and commaunded them
tell no man that

that they shulde
thinge,

22 Sayinge, That the sonne off" man
must suffre many thynges, and be re-
proved of the seniours, and of the hy
prestes, and scribes, and be slayne, and
the thirde daye rise agayne.

23 And he sayde to them all, Yf eny
man will come after me, let hym denye
hym silfe, and take his crosse on hym
dayly, and folowe me.

24 Whosoever will save his life, shall
lo.se it ; and whosoever shall lose; his life
for my sake, the same shall save it.

25 For what shall itt avauntage a man,
to wyn the whole worlde, yfi' he loose
hym silfe, or riinne in domagc off hym
silfe?

26 For whosoever is ashamed of me
njid off my sayiuges, off liym shall the
Sonne of man be ashamed, when ho

;

1

3:34

GOTHIC, 3^0.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Like

amnia, yali

attins, yah j)izc weilmne

feeder, and halegra engla.

aggt'le.

27 Qijuli )mn izwis, sunya sind sumai
ni kaus-
J)ize her
yand dau))au, uute gasaiwhaud j)iud-
iuassau GuJ^s.

staiidaiidane,

[nuei

daf^os

28 Waiir];uii )\an afar |)0 "Wiiurda swe
Paltru yah
lakobu yah lohaunen, us'iddya m fair-
guni bidyau.

i^animands

ahtau,

29 Yah war}) mi)>]?anei ba|> i's, siuns
andwair{)yis is anjara, yah gawaseins is
whcita skeinaiidci.

30 Yah sai ! wairos twai mi))rodidedua

i'mma, |)aici wcsun Closes yali ITelias,

31 pai gasaiwhanans in wul|niu ;

cjc})-
un urruns is, ])oei skulda usfullyan in
lairusalcm.

32 If) Paitrus, yah |)ai

niij) imma,
"wesun kauridai slcpa, gawaknandans jnin
gascwhiin wuIIju is, yah })ans twaus
\vairans Jjans mij)staudandans imma.

af imma, cja})

33 Yah war}>, nn)))\inci afskaiskaidun
Taitrus du losiia,
Rik
Talzyand, god ist iinsis her wisan, yah
gawaurkyaima hlei|)ros jjrins, aina })us,
yah aina Mosc, yah aina Heliyin ; ni
witands wha qi]>i|).

34 pata

|)an imma qi|iandin,

war])

iiiillima, yah ufarskadwida ins ;
faurlit-
ide(hin |)an, in |iannnei yainai qcnmn
in })amma milhmin.

35 Yah stibna war}) us j^amma milh-
min, (|i|'andei, 8a ist snnus meins sa
liuba, I'amma liausyaij).

36 Yali war}) mi|)|>anci so stibna, bi-
gitans warj) Jesus ains.
eis jmli-
uidedun, yali mann ni gataihun in yain-
aini dagam ni waiht, )>izei gasewhnn.

\ii\i

37 AVai|) |\in in )mnima daga, dalaj)
nti^aggaiidam im af fairgunya, gainotida
imma niana'^ins filu.

o

27 Ic secge eow, 86})liee lier synd sume
standende, da dcade ne wurdaj), air big
Godes rice geseon.

28 Da wa'S geworden aeftcr dam Avord-
uin ncan eahta dagas, diet he nam
Petrum and Ljhamiem and laeobum,
and code on aiinc munt, da't he liyiie
gebiede.

29 Da he hyne gebied, da wscs hys
ansyn odres hiwes, and his reaf Invit
scinende.

30 Da spraecon twegen weras wid hyne,
Moyses and Helias

3

Gesewene on mnegen-j'rymme ; and
ssedon his gewiteiiduesse, de he to ge-
fyllenne wa'S on Ilierusalcm.

32 Petrus, and da de mid him wa'ron,
wurdon mid slaepe gehefegode, and da
hi onwaecnedon hi gesawon his UKegen-
))rym, and twcgcn weras dc mid him
stodon.

.

33 .

. And hi liim fram eodon, Petrus
cwie)) to liim, Eala bebeodend, g^d is
da^t we her beon, and uton wyreaii |>reo
eardung-stowa, ane de, and aue Moyse,
and juie Helie ; and he uyste hwtvt he
cwai}).

34 Da he dis sp.TC, da wcarj) gonip,
and ofer-seeadede big; and hi ondredon,
him gangende on diet genip.

35 Da com stefen of dam gcnijic, and
cwa'|), Dcs ys min leofa sum, ge-
byraj) liyno.

^6 \)'i seo stefen wa^s gehyred, d i wa^s
And hi siiw-
so Ha'Iend gemot ana.
o(b)n, and ne sjedon niinuni men on
dam dagum nan j'ing, da^s de hi ge-
sawon.

37 O'lTrum dapgo, him of dam nuinte
farendum, liim agcn arn niycel menego.

38 Yah sai ! manna us ))izai managein
ufwopida, (jil^ands, Laisari, bidya |nik,
du sunu mcinamnia, unto
insaiwlian
aiiiaha mis ist

38 Da clypode an wer of da^ro menego,
and cwa'|), Lareow, ic luilsige de, geseoh
niinne sunu, fordam he is min aulica
sunu :

;

1

IX. 27-38.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

335

his mageste, and of the fadir, and of the
hooly aungels.

'27 Forsoth I seye to 50U, verily ther ben
' Bumme stondinge here, whiche schulen
not taste deeth, til thei seen the rewme
of God.

28 Sothli it was don aftir thes wordis
almoost ei^te dayes, and he took Petre
and James and John, and he sti^ede in
to an hil, that he schulde preie.

commeth in his awne maieste, and in
the maieste of his father, and of the
holy angels.

27 I tell you of a surety, some there
are of them thatt here stonde, which
shall not tast of deeth, till they se the
kyngdom of God.

28 And it folowed about an viij. dayes
sayinges, he toke Peter
after thoose
James and Jhon, and went vp into a
mouutayne to praye.

29 And the while he preiede, the lik-
nesse of his cheere was maad othir maner,
and his clothing whit schynynge.

30 And loo ! tweye men spaken with

him, forsothe Moyses and Elye

31 AVeren seyn in mageste; and thei
seyden his goynge out, which he was to
fillinge in Jerusalem.

3 2 Forsothe Petre, and thei that weren
with him, weren greuyd with sleep, and
thei wakinge sy5en his mageste, and
tweye men that stooden with him.

29 And as he prayed, the fassion of his
countenaunce was changed, and his gar-
ment was whyte and shoone.

30 And beholde ! two men talked with

him, and they were Moses and Helias,

3

Which apered gloriously ; and spake
of his departinge, whych he shulde ende
att Jerusalem.

32 Peter, and they that wer with hym,
wer hevy a slepe, and when they woke
they sawe his maieste, and two men
stondinge with him.

33 And it was don, whanne thei depart-
iden fro him, Petre seith to Jhesu, Com-
andour, it is good to vs for to be here,
and make we here thre tabernaclis, oon
to thee, and oon to Moyses, and oon to
not witinge what he schulde
Elye ;
seye.

34 Sothli him spekinge thes thingis, a
cloude was maad, and schadewide hem ;
and thei dredden, hem entringe in to
the clowde.

35 And a voys was maad fro the clowde,
seyinge, This is my dereworthe sone,
hecre 56 him.

36 And the while the vois was maad,
Jliesu was fouuden aloone. And thei
helden ])ecs, and se'do to no man in tho
dayes ou3t of tho thingis, whiclie thei
haddcn lierd.

37 Forsothe it was don in the day
suyngc, hem comynge doun of the hil,
niyche cumpanye of pcplc rennetli to
hem.

38 And loo ! a man of tho cinnpanyc
cricde, seyinge, Muistir, I liiserhc thee,
byhold in to my sone, for lie
is oon
aloone to me

33 And hit chaunsed, as they departed
from hym, Peter
sayde vnto Jesus,
Master, it is goocle beinge here for vs,
let vs make thre tabernacles, won for
the, and won for Moses, and won for
Helias ; and wist nott what he sayde.

34 Whyll he thus spake, there cam a
cloude, and shadowed them ; and they
feared, when they entred into the cloude.

35 And there cam a voyce out of the
cloude, sayinge, This is my dcare sonne,
heare hym.

36 And as sone as the voice was past,
Jesus was founde alone. And they kei)t
it cloosse, and tolde noo man in thoose
dayes eny of those thyngcs, which they
had scne.

37 llyt chaunsed on the ncxtc dayc,
as they cam doune from the hyll, mochc
people cam and met hyni.

38 And Ijcliolde ! a man off the com-
pany crycd out, sayinge, Master, 1 1)C-
seche the, ]»eholdc my sonne, for he is
all that I have ;

330

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

39 Yah sai ! alima iiimij) nia iinlirains,
yah anaks hrojioi}), yali taliyij) iiui mij)
wlia]'on, yali halisuiw afliimij) af iiiima
galjrikands 111a.

39 And mi !

sc uncla-na gast hine
ait-hr'iijs and he fa}rlice hrym|), and
fornim}) hyne, and faem]), and hyue tyrj)
and slit.

40 Yali

|'einang,
usdribeina imma, yah iii mahtedun.

siponyans

baj)

ei

41 Andhafyands ]?an lesus qa'p, O !
kimi uiii^ahiubyando yah inwindo, und
wha siaii at izwis, yah })ulaii izwis ?
attiuh J)ana suuu |)ciuana hidrei.

42 paruh nauh|)an duats^agj^andin im-
ma, i^ahrak ina sa unliuljja, yah tahida.
Gawhotida |)an lesus ahmiii })ainnia uii-
hrainyin, yah gahailida ])aua magu, yah
atgaf ina attin is.

alhx

At allaim

I'an waurjjun allai ana
43 Usfiliiians
])izai mikilcin
Gu))S.
{^an
))oei gatawida
siUlaleikyandam hi
icsus, qaj) Paitrus, Frauya, duwhe weis
ni mahtedum us(h'eiban jamnia]
1\>
lesus fja]>, pata kuni ni usi^'aggij), nibai
in bidoni yah in fastubnya.
Qa]) j'au
du siponyani seinaim,

44 Lagyij) yus in ausona izwara j)0
ist

waurda, unte sunus mans skulds
atixiban in handuns manue.

CIS ni

45 Ijj

froj'un j'amnia waurda,
yali was gahulij) faura ini, ei ni fr()J)eina
imma ;
yah ohtedun fraihnan ina bi
jiata waurd.

40 And ic hsed dine leorning-cnihtas,
c!a?t hig hine ut-adrifon, and hig ne
militon.

41 Da cwa*]> se Ha/lend him to and-
sware, Ealu ! ungeleafulle and j>weore
cneorcsse, swa lange swfi ic beo mid
eow, and eow [)olie 1
Ised hider diuue
sunu.

42 And da he hyne hidde him to, se
Da
deofol hine fornam, and fordyde.
nydde se Iltclend done unclscnan gast
lit, and gchaelde doene cnapan, and ageaf
hine his faider.

43 Da wundredon hig ealle be Godcs
And eallum wundricndum be

mscrjje.
dam ])ingum de gcwurdon,

he cwoej? to his Icorning-cnihtum,

44 A'setta)? das sprwea on cowrum
heortum, hit ys toweard, do't niaunes
sunu si geseald on manna handa.

45 Da |)ohton hig dis word, and liit
wnes bcwrigcn beforan him, divt hi hit
ne ongeton ; and hi ne dorston hine be
dam worde ilhsiau.

46 Galai)>

niitons 'in
wharyis j-au izc niaists wesi.

|)an

ins,

)>ata

46 Suj'licc da't gcj'anc code on hig,

47

lesus

ga'^aiwhands Jul miton
liairtins 'izc, fairgreipands barn, gnsatida
faura sis

1[)

;

48 Yah qa|> du im, Sawhazuh saci
j^ata barn ana nainin mein-
andninii}'
ainiuik, mik aiidiiiini|) ; yah sawhazuh
saei mik andniiiii|', andiiiini)) jiana sand-
yaiidan mik ; unte sa ininnista wisands
'in allaim Vzwis, sa wair|M|> niikils.

lohannes

49 Andhafyands |)an

qa)%
Talzyand, gasewhum suniana ana jiein-
nnima namin usdreibandan unhul)>ons,
yah waridedum iiiinia, unte ni laisteiji
luij) unsis.

50 Yali (|a|) du Vm lesus, Ni waryi)>,

hwylc hyra yldcst waM'c.
47 Da se Hajlend gesch hyra heortan
gel^ancas, he gcsctte da^ue cnapan wid
hine ;

48 And cwa?|i to liim, Se dc dysne
cnapan on minum nanian onfchj', se me
onfeh}* ; and se de me oiifel\|>, he onfch|>
da^ie dc me scnde ; witodlicc sc de is
la'st bctwcox cow ealle, se is mara.

40 Da andswarode lohannes, Bcbcod-
end, we gis.iwon sumne on dinuni
naman dcofol-seocnessa ut-adrifcnde, and
we hine forbudon, fordam he mid us ne
fylygj..^

50 Da cw.t}> he, Ne forbeode ge, se de

IX. 39-50.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

39 And lo ! a spirit takitli him, and
sudenly he crieth, and hurtlith down,
and to-drawith him with
froth, and
vnnethe he goth awey to-drawinge him.

40 And I preiede thi disciph's, that
thei schulde caste him out, and thei
my3ten not.

vnfeithful

41 Sothli Jhesu answeringe seide to
hem, A !
generacioun and
weyward, hou longe schal I be anentis
50U, and schal sujfifre 30U] lead hidur
thi soue.

42 And whanne he cam ny^, the fend
hurlide him doun, and to-brayd. And
Jhesu blamede the vnclene spirit, and
heelide the child, and 5eld him to his
fadir.

43 Sothli alle men wondriden greetly
in the greetnesse of God. And alle men
wondringe in alle thingis whiche he dide,

1

;

TYNDALE, 1526.

337
3 9 And se ! a sprete taketh hym, and
sodenly he cryeth, and be teareth hym,
that he fometh agayne, and vueth de-
parteth he from him when he hath
rent him.

40 And I have besought thy disciples

to cast hym out, and they coulde nott.

4

Jesus answered and sayde,

! gene-
racion with oute fayth and croked, howe
longe shall I be with you, and shall
suffre you ? brynge thy sonne bidder.

42 As he yett was a commynge, the
fende rent hym, and tare hym.
Jesus
rebuked the vnclene sprete, and healed
the chylde, and delivered hym to hys
father.
43 And they wer all amased att the
myghty power of God.
Whyll they
wondred every one att all thynges whych
he did,

he seide to his disciplis,

he sayde vnto hys disciples,

44 Putte 3e thes wordiB in ^oure hertis,
for it is to comynge, that mannis sone
be bitrayed in to the hondis of men.

45 And thei knewen not this word,
and it was hid bifore hem, that thei
feeliden it not ; and thei dreden to axe
him of this word.

46 Forsothe a thou3t entride in to

licm, wlio of hem schulde be more.

47 And Jhesu seynge the thou3tis of
hem, takynge a child
the herte
settido him bisydis him silf;

of

48 And Hcith to hem. Who euere schal
receyue this child in my name, rcceyueth
me ; and who euere sclial receyue me,
rcceyueth hym that seiite me ; for whi
he that is Icsse among 30U alle, is the
more.

49 Forsoth John answeringe

seide,
Comaundour, we Hy3en sum man cast-
inge out fendis in tin name, and we han
forbodyn him, for he sueth not thee with

vs.

44 Lett these sayinges synke doune
into youre eares, the tyme wyll come,
when the sonne off man shalbe delivered
into the liondes off men.

45 Butt they wist nott what that
worde meant, and yt was hyd from
them, thatt they vnderstod hytt nott
and they feared to axe hym off that
sayinge.

46 There arose a disputacion amonge

them, who shulde be the greatest.
47 When Jesus perceaved the thoughtes
off their hertes, he toke a chylde, and
sett hym hard by hym ;

48 And sayde vnto them. Whosoever
receave thys chylde in my name, re-
ceaveth me ; and whosoever rcceaveth
me, rcceaveth hym that sent me ; for
he that amongest you ys the least, the
same slialbe greate.

49 J lion answered and say«le. Muster,
we sawe won castynge out devyls in thy
name, and we forbade hym, be cause ho
folowcth not with vs.

50 And JhcHU scith to him, Nyle 3c

50 And Jesus sayde vnto hyni, Forbid

1

338

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

unte saei nist wi|)ra Yzwis, faur izwis
'''Ni ainsliun auk 1st iiianne, saei
ist.
ni gawaurkyai nialit in namiii mciu-
amma.

51 War|> jian, 'in jjanimei iisfulnodcdun
dagos andanunitais is, yah is andwair[)i
seinata gatulgida, du gaggan in lairu-
Balem ;

52 Yah insandida aiinius faura sis. Yali
gaggandans galij?un in haim ^amarcitc,
swe manwyan imma.

53 Yah ni andncmun ina, unte and-

wairjji is was gaggando du lairusalem.

siponyos

54 Gasaiwhandans J)an

is,
lakobus yah lohannes, qej)un, Frauya,
wilcizu ci qi|)aima, fon atgaggai us him-
ina, yah fraqimai im, swe yah Heleias
gatawida 1

55 Gawandyands ])an gasok im, yah
qa}) du im, Niu witu}), whis ahmaue
siyu); ;

56 Unte sunus mans ni qam saiwalom
Yah iddycdun in

qistyan, ak nasyan.
anj)ara haim.
57 War)) j;an, gaggandam im in wiga,
qa{> sums du imma, Laistya Jjuk, ])is-
whaduh ]>adci gaggis, Frauya.

nis ongen cow, se is for cow

51 S6})lice waes geworden, cla his and-
fenga dagas waeron gefyllede, he ge-
trymede hys ansyne, dset he ferde to
Hierusalem ;
52 Da sende he bodan befuran liis
ansyne. Da eodon hig on da ceastrc
hi him gegear-
Samaritanorum, dset
wodon.
53 And liig ne onfengon hine, fordam
de he wolde faran to Hierusalem.

54 Da his leorning-cnihtas da?t ge-
sawon, lacobus and lohannes, da cwaed-
on hig, Drihten, wylt dii we secga}?,
diet fyr cume of heofone, and fornime

Ug-i ....
55 And he hine bewende, and liig

jjreade.

56

And hifj ferdon on oder castel.
57 Da hi ferdon on wege, sum him
to cwa3)), Ic fylige de, swa hwyder swa
dii fierst.

58 Yah qa|) du imma lesus, Fauhons
grobos aigun, yah fuglos himinis sit-
lans, 'i\> sunus mans ni
habai)> whar
haubi)) galagyai.
..59 Q«^l' I'^i^^ ^^u an|>aramma, Laistci mik.
I|) is qa|i, Frauya, ushiubci mis galeij>an
faur|>is, yah usfilhan attan meinana.

60 Qa|) ))an du imma lesus, Let ^mns
ij) jm

dauj)ans usfilhan scinans nawins ;
gagg, yah gaspiUo |>iudangardya Gujis.

6

Qaj) |ian yali anj'ar, Laistya |)uk,
Frauya, i}) faur|>is us]aul)ei mis and<ji|>an
])aim j)aiei sind in garda meinamma.

58 Da cwa^j) se Hselend, Foxas liabliaj>
holu, and heofones fugelas nest, soj^liee
mannes sunu na'f|> hwar he hys heafod
aiiylde.

59 Dfi cwa>|) lie to odrum, Filig me.
Da cwtej) he, Drihten, alyf me a?rest
byrigan minne f{«der.

60 i)a cwa^f) se Hrelend, Lict da dead-
gsi dii, and

an byrigan hyra deadan ;
boda Godes rice.

61 Da ewa^}) odor, Tc fylige de, Drih-
ten, ac la:t me airest hit cydan dam de
xt ham synd.

62 Qa)' \mn du imma lesus, Ni manna
uslairyands handu seina ana hohan, yah
paiwliands aftra, gatils ist in j»iudan-
gardya Guj)S.

62 Da cwa")' se Haclend him to, Xan
man de hys hand a-set on hys sulh, and
besyhj>, nys andfenge Godes
on-bajc

rice.

GiiAP. X.

I Afaru)i-|)nu j^ata ustaik-
uida Frauya yah anjnuans sibuntchund,

Chap. X.

^i ^ftcr dam se Hn^lend
gemcarcode odrc twii and hund-scofentig,

1

;

;

;

IX. 5I.-X. I.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

339

forbede, forsotlie he that is not a3ens

50U, is for 30U. ....

ye hym not, for he that is nott agaynst
you, is with you

5

Sothli it was don, whanne the dayes
of his takynge vp weren fillid, and he
settide faste his face, that he schulde go
in to Jerusalem

52 And he sente messangeris bifore his
si3t. And thei goynge entriden in to a
citee of Samaritans, that thei schulden
make redy to him.
53 And thei receyueden not him, for
tlie face was of him goynge in to Jeru-
salem.

54 Forsothe whanne James and John,
his disciplis, hadden seyn, thei seiden,
Lord, wolt thou we seye, that her come
doun fro heuene, and waaste hem, as
Helye did ?
55 And he turned blamyde hem, sey-
inge, 3e witen not, whos spiritis ^e ben

56 Forsothe mannis sone cam not for
And

to leese soulis, but for to saue.
thei wenten in to another castel.

57 Forsoth it was don, hem walkynge
in the weye, sum man seide to him, I
schal sue thee, whidur euere thou schalt

58 And Jhesu seide to him, Foxis han
dennys, and briddis of the eyr han nestis,
l)ut mannis sone hath not where he schal
reste his heed.

59 Forsothe he seide to another. Sue
Sothli he seide, Lord, suffre

tliou me.
me first to go, and to burie my fadir.

60 And Jhesu seide to him, Suffre that
deede men burie her dcedc ; but go
thou, and telle the kyngdora of God.

61 And anothir seide. Lord, I schal
sue thee, but first suffre me to telle a3en
to hem that ben at home.

62 Forsothe Jhesu soith to liim, No
man KCiidyngc his bond to the plou3,
and biholdiiigc
to the
rcwme of God.

a3en, is

able

5 r And it folowed, when the time was
com that he slmlde be receaved vp, that
he determined hym silfe, to goo to Jeru-
salem ;

52 And sent messengers before hym.
And they went and entred into a citie
of the Samaritans, to make redy for
hym.

53 And they wolde nott receave hym,
because his face was as though he wolde
goo to Jerusalem.

54 When hys disciples, James and Jhon,
sawe that, they sayde, Lorde, wilt thou
that we commaunde, that fyre come
doune from heven, and consume them,
even as Helias did 1

55 Jesus turned about and rebuked
them, sayinge. Ye wote nott, what maner
sprete ye are off

56 The Sonne of man ys not come to
destroye mennes lives, but to save them.
And they went to an other toune.

57 Hit chaunsed, as they went on their
iorney, a certayne man sayd vnto hym,
I wyll folowe the, whither soever thou
goo.

58 Jesus sayd vnto him, Foxes have
holes, and bryddes of the ayer have
nestes, but the sonnc of man hath nott
where on to laye hys heed.

59 And he sayde vnto a nother, Folowe
And the same sayde, Lorde, suffre
me.
me fyrst to goo, and bury my father.
60 Jesus sayd vnto hym, Lett the deed
bury the deed ; but goo thou, and preache
the kyngdome off God.

61 And another sayde, I wyll folowe
the, Lorde ; but Ictt me fyrst goo bid
them fare wcle which are at home at
my lioussc.

62 Jesus sayd vnto him. No man that
putteth hys liondc to the plowe, and
loketh backe, is ai)te to the kingdom
of God.

Chap. X. i Forsotlie affir thfs thincris

i After that the Lordo
the Lord Jhesu ordeynedc and otherc ^ apoynted other seventie also, and sent

Chap. X.

z 2

1

;

;

;

340

GOTHIC, 360.

AXGLO-SAXOX, 995.

[St. Luke

yuli insuudidu ins twiins Nvlianzuh faiira
aiidvvair}?ya seinainiua in all baurge yah
static, jjadei muiiaida is gaggaii.

and scndc big twam beforan his ansyne
on aelce ccastre and stowe, de he to
curaeune waes.

2 Qa})uh ]>an du im, Asans manacja, "i}>
l)iilyi[) nu fraiiyun
waurstwy.ans fawai ;
asanais, ci ussatyai waurstwyans in 1)0
asan scina.

2 And cwcTe}? to him, Her is mycel np,
and feawa. wyThtena ; biddajj das ripes
hlfiford, dait he scnde wyrht: n to his
ripe.

3 GaggiJ), sai ! ik insandya I'zwis swc

3 Fara|7, nu ! ml ic eow sende swa

laniha in miduniai wuife.

swa lamb l)etweox wulfas.

4 Ni bairaijj pugg, nih matibalg, nih

gaskohi, ui manuanhun bi wig golyai|>.

4 Ne here ge sacc, ne codd, ne gesey,

ne nanne man be wege ne gretaj).

5 In |>ane gardei inngagaaij), fi'umist

qi))ai|), Gawairjji ))amma garda.

6 Yah yabai siyai yainar sunus ga-
•,vair})yis, gawheilai|> sik ana imnm ga-
i]> yabai ni, du izwis
\vair);i izwar ;
gawandyai.

7 Inuh J)an );amma

wisaij',
matyandans yah driggkandans jjo at im
wair}>s auk ist waurstwya mizdons sein-
aizos.

Ni faraij^ us garda in gard.

garda

8 Yah in

|wci baurge gaggai|>, yah
faur-

andniniaina izwis, matyaij> jjata
lagido izwis ;

9 Yah Ickinoj)

})ans in izai siukans.
Yah qi)>i|> du im, Atncwhida ana izwis
Jjiudangardi Gujis.

10 1|) in |)oci baurge inngaggai}), yah
ni anilnimaina izwis, usgaggandans ana
fauradaurya izos, qijuii}),

1

Yah stubyu

l>ana gahaftnandan
unsis us ))izai baurg izwarai ana fotuns
unsarans aflirisyam izwis ; swc|)auh j-.ata
jnitei atncwhida sik ana izwis
witei|>,

]>iudangardi Guj'S.

12 Q\\>a. izwis, |'atei Saudaumvam in
yainamina daga sutizo wair))i}> |)au )Mzai
baurg yainai.

13 Wai JMis,

Kaurazein ;

jnis,
]*ai|\s;ii(lan ; unte i|> in Twrai yah Sci-
donai waur|HMna mahteis, }>oz('i waur|nm
in izwis, airis j-au in sakkum yah azgon
eitandeins, gaidrcigodedeina.

wai

5 On swa liwylc bus swa ge in-ga}>,
cwccta|j cerest, Sib si disse hiw-raHlcnne.
6 And gyf dar beo|? sybbe beam, reste
dar eower sib ; gif hit elles sy, heo sy
to eow gecyrred.

7 Wunigajj on dam ylcan huse, and
etaj) and drinca]) da |iing de hig habba|)
s6j)lice se wyrhta is his mcde wyrde.
Ne fare ge frani huse to hiise.

8 Ac on swa hwylce ceastre swa ge
in-ga]5, and hig eow onfojj, eta}> dat eow
toforan aset ys

9 And geha51a|> da imtniman de 'on
dam hiise synd. And secga[) him, Godes
rice to cow geneala^c)?.

10 On swa hwylce ceastre swa ge in-
gn]>, and hig nc onf6|) eow, gii}) on hyra
stra?ta, and cweda]),

I r Da^t dust da^t of eo^^^*c ceastre on
urum fotum cbfode we drigcaj) on cow;
witaj) dcah, dajt Godes rice geucala'cj'.

12 Ic cow secge, dapt Sodom-warum
on dam dn>ge bi|> forgifenlicre donne
da3re ccastre.

13 Wa de, Corozaim ; wa de, Bcth-
saida ; fordam gif on Tyro and on
Sydone gcwordcne wa»ron da mopfcnu,
de on eow gcdone synd, gcfyrn hig on
ha? ran and on axan, hreowsunge dydou.

14 Swcjiauli Twrai yah Seidonai sutizo

wairj)i)) in daga stuuos jjau izwis.

14 Dcah hwicdcrc Tiro and Sy<lonc on
dam da^ge by]) forgyfculicre donne eow.

1'

1

2
1

;

X. 2-14.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

341

seuenty and tweyne, and sente hem by
tweyne and tweyne bifore his face in to
euery citee and place, wliidir he was to
comynge.

2 And he seide to hem, Sothli myche
ripe corn is, but fewe workmen ; ther-
fore preie 56 the lord of the ripe corn,
that he sende workmen in to his rype
corn.

3 Go 56, lo ! I sende 50U as lambren a

mong wolues.

4 Nyle 56 here a sachel, nether scrip,
nether schoon, and greete 56 no man by
the weye.

5 And in to what euere hous ^e schulen

entre, first seye 36, Pees to this hous.

6 And if a sone of pees schal be there,
if non,

5oure pees schal reste on him ;
it schal turne a3en to 30U.

7 Forsothe dwelle 3e in the same hous,
etynge and drynkinge tho thingis that
ben at hem ;
forsothe a workman is
worthi his hyre. Nyle 56 passe fro hous
in to hous.

8 And in to what euere citee 56 schulen
entre, and thei schulen receyue 30U, ete
36 tho thingis that ben put to 30U ;

9 And heele 36 the syke men that ben
ther ynne. And seye 36 to hem, The
kyngdom of God schal nei3e in to 30U.

10 In to what euer citee 36 schulen
entre, and thei schulen not receyue 30U,
36 goynge out in to the streetis thereof,
seie,

1

Also we wypen of in to 30U the
poudere that cleuyde to vs of 30ure
citee ; ncthelecs wite 36 this thing, for
the rcwme of God schal come ny3.

12 Forsoth I scic to 50U, for to Sodom
it schal be esyere^ than to that citee in
thilke day.

13 Woo to thee, Corosaym ; woo to
for if in Tyre and
thee, Bcthsayda ;
Sydon the vertucs haddcn ben don,
whichc ben don in thee, sum tymc thei
sittingc in hcor and aiwche, schulden
hauc don pcnauncc.

14 NethclcH to Tyre and Sydon it schal

be esyer in the dom than to 30U.

them two and tAvo before his face into
every citie and place, whither he him
silfe wolde come.

2 And sayde vnto them, The harvest is
greate, but the laborers are feawe ; praye
therfore the lorde of the harvest, to send
forth hys laborers into hys hervest.

3 Goo youre wayes, beholde ! I sende

you forthe as lambes amonge wolves.

4 Beare noo wallet, nether scryppe, nor
shues, and salute noo man by the waye.

5 In whatsoever housse ye enter in,

fyrst saye, Peace be to this housse.

6 And yf the sonne of peace be theare,
youre peace shall rest apon hym ; yf
nott, yt shall returne to you agayne.

7 And in the same housse tary still,
eatynge and drinkynge suche as they
have j for the laborer is worthy ofi" hys
rewarde. Go not from housse to housse.

8 And in to whatsoever citie ye enter,
yf they receave you, eate whatsoever is
set before you

9 And heale the sicke that are theare.
And saye vnto them. The kyngdom of
God is come neye apon you.

10 But into whatsoever citie ye shall
enter, yf they receave you not, goo youre
wayes out into the stretes of the same,
and saye,

1

Even the very dust which cleaveth
on vs of youre citie we wype of agaynst
you ; nott with stondyngc marke this,
that the kyngdom of God was come
ncye apon you.

1

Ye and I saye vnto you, that it shalbo
easier in that daye for Sodom then for
that citie.

13 Wo be to the, Chorozin ; wo be to
the, Bcthsaida ; for if the miracles had
bene done in Tyre and Sidon, which have
bene done in you, they had a greate
wliylc agone repented, sittyng in hccrc
and asshcs.

14 Neverthelessc it shalbo easier for
Tyre and Sidon at the iiulgmont then
for you.

;

6

342

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

15 Yah ]?ii, Kafarnaum, ]m und liimin

usliauliiclo, und lialya gadrausyaza.

15 And du, Cafarnaum, od heofon up-

ahafeij, dil byst ott helle besenced.

16 Saei hausei}) izwis, mis liausei}?

yah saei iifbrikij) izwis, mis iifbriki}) ; i|)
saei iifl)riki|) mis, ut'ljiiki|) J^amma saiid-
yandin mik.

17 Oawandidedun ])i\n sik ])i\\ sibun-
teh'uiid mi}) fahechii, qil>aiulans, Fraiiya,
yah unljiil|)oii3 ufhausyaud unsis
in
iiamiii })einamma.

18 Q;\\) ))an du im, Gasawli Satanan,

swe hiuhmuiiya, driusaiidau us himiua.

1

Me gehyr}), se de eow gehyr|> ; and
me oferhogaj), se cle eow oferhoga}) ; sc
tie me oferhogaJ>, he oferhogaj> done de
me sende.

17 Da gecyrdon da twa and hund-
seofentig mid gcfean, and cweedon, Drih-
ten, deofol-seocnessa us synd on diuum
naman under-})eodde.

18 Da saede he him, Ic geseah Satanan,

swa swa lig-raesc, of heofone feulleufle.

19 Sai ! atgaf izwis waldufni trudan
ufaro waurme, yah skauri)yono, yah aua
allai mahtai fiyandis, yah waihte aino-
bun izwis ni gaska|)yi|).

20 Swejjauh [)amma ni fsigiuo)), ei |'ai
ahmans 'izwis ufhausyand ;
ij? fagiuod,
"in |)ammci namna izwara gamelida sind
in hiniinam.

19 And ml ! ic sealde eow anweald to
tredenne ofer meddran, and snacan, and
ofer selc feondes maegen, and nan J)ing
eow ne deraj?.

20 Deah hwsedere ne blissijre jrc, on
dam de eow synd gastas under-j)eodde ;
geblissia}), dset eower naman sjiid on
heofonum awritene.

})us,

Andliaita

21 inuh |>izai wheilai swegnida ahmin
lesus, yah qa}),
atta,
Frauya himiiiis yah airjjos, untc aff'alht
|)0 faura siiutraim yah frodaim, yah and-
Yai, atta, unte
hulides ]>o iiiukUiliaim.
swa warj) galeikaij) in andwair})ya jjein-
Yah gawandijjs du siponyani
amma.
seinaim qa|),

22 All mis atgiban 1st fram attin
meinamma, yah ni whashun kann, whas
ist sunus, alya atta ; yah whas "ist atta,
sunus, yah |)ammci wili sunus
alya
andhulyan.

23 Yah gawandi|)S du siponyam sein-
aim, sundro qa]?, AudaL,^a augona, jjoci
saiwhand ))Oci yus saiwhi|).

24 Qi))a auk izwis,

jiatei manngai
l)raufeteis yah })iudaiU)S wildedun saiwh-
ga-
an,
sewhun ; yah hausyan, |iatei yus ga-
hauseij>, yah di hausidedun.

sai win |), yah

yus

))atei

ni

21 On da?re tide he on Halgum Gaste
geblissode, and cwib}>, Ic andctte de,
fa'der, Drihten heofones and eorj^an,
fordam de du das
})ing wisum and
gleaAvum behyddest, and lytlini^um a-
fordam hit beforan de
wrujje.
swa gelicode.

.

.

.

22 Ealle |)ing me synd fram minum
fajder gesealdo, and nan man luit, hwylc
nc- hwylc
is se sunu, biiton se f*der ;
is se f:vder, butoii se sunu, and se de se
sunu hit awreon wyle.^

23 Da cwtej)

Icorning-
cnihtum bewend, Eadii/e svnd da eai:-
an, de gcseo}> da }nng de ge geseo|>.

he, to

his

24 S6})lice ic eow sccge, djvt manega
witegan and cyningas woldon gescon
dait gc geseof), and hig liit nc gesawon ;
and woldon gehyran da't ge gehyraj>,
and hig hit ne gehyrdon.

25 Yah sai ! witodafiisteis sums usto|>,
fraisands ina, yah qi|>aiul8, Laisari, wlia
tauyands libaiuais aiwciuons arbya wair-

25 Dii aras sum jc-glcaw man, and
fandode his, and cwa3|>, Lareow, hwa^t
do ic dajt ic ece lif ha?bbc 1

\>a1

26 paruh qaji du imma, Yn witoda wlia

gamcli|) ist ^ whaiwa ussiggwis ?
andhafyands i\a\f,

Friyos
Frauyan Gu)> j^cinaua us allamma Imir-

27 ![»

13

26 Da cWiTJ) he to him, Hw.Tt is ge-

"writen on da^re iv ? hu rsctst dii 1

27 Da andswarode he, Lufa Drihten
dinuc God of calre diure beortan, and

5
8

;

9

X. T5-27-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

343

1

And thou, Cafarnaum, ert enhaunsid
til to heuene ; thou schalt be drenchid
til in to helle.

16 He that heerith 50U, heerith me;
and he that dispisith 50U, dispisith me
forsothe he that dispisith me, dispisith
him that sente me.

17 Forsoth two and seuenty discipUs
turnedyn a3ein with ioye, seyinge, Lord,
also fendis ben sujet to vs in thi name.

1

And he seith to hem, I sy^ Sathanas

fallinge doun fro heuene, as leit.

T 9 And loo ! I haue ^ouun to 50U power
of defoulinge''' on serpents, and scor-
piouns, and on al the vertu of the enemy,
and no thing schal anoye 50U.

20 Netheles nyle 3e haue ioye in this
thing, for fendis ben sujet to 50U ; but
ioye 5ee, that 30ure names ben writun
in heuenes.

21 In thilke our he gladide in the
Hooly Goost, and seide, I knowleche to
thee, fadir. Lord o'f heuene and erthe,
which hast hid thes thingis fro wyse
men and prudent, and hast schewid hem
to litle.
3^6, fadir, for so it pleside
bifore thee

22 AUe thingis ben 50uun to me of my
fadir, and no man woot, who is the sone,
no but the fadir ; and who is the fadir,
no but the sone, and to whom the sone
wolde schewe.

23 And he turned to his disciplis, seide,
Blessid ben the y3en, whiche seen tho
tliingis that 3c seen.

24 Sothli 1 seie to 30U, for many pro-
phetis and kyngis wolden se tho thingis,
whiche 36 seen, and thei sy3en not ; and
hcere tho thingis, tliat 3e hccre, and thei
herden not.

25 And lo! a wysc man of the lawo
rooH, tcmptinge him, an<l scyingc, Mai.stir,
what thing doyngc schal 1 welde cuer-
la.stinge lyf?

26 And lie seide to him. What is writun

in the lawe 1 hou redist thou ?

27 lie aiiHweringc scidc, Tliou sdialt
loue the Lord thi God of al tliyn licrtc,

15 And thou, Capernaum, which art
exalted to heven, shalt be thrust doune
to hell.

16 Whosoever heareth you, heareth
me ; and whosoever despiseth you, de-
spiseth me ; and he that despeseth me,
despiseth hym that sent me.

sayinge, Lorde,

17 The seventie returned agayne with
even the very
ioye,
devyls are subdued to vs thorowe thy
name.

18 And he sayde vnto them, I sawe
Sathan, as it had bene lightenyng, faule
doune from heven.

1

Beholde ! I geve vnto you power
to treade on serpentes, and scorpions,
and apon all maner power of the enemy,
and nothynge shall hurte you.

20 Neverthelesse in thys reioyse nott,
that the spretes are vnder youre power ;
butt reioyse, be cause youre names are
written in heven.

21 That same time reioysed Jesus in
the Sprete, and sayde, I prayse the,
father, Lorde of heven and erth, be cause
thou hast hyd these thynges from the
wyse and prudent, and hast opened theni
Even soo, father, for
to the folisshe.
soo pleased it the

22 All thynges are geven me off my
father, and noo man knoweth, who tlie
Sonne is, butt the father ; nether who
the father is, save the sonne, and he to
whom the sonne wyll shewc hym.

23 And he turned to his disciples, and
the eyes,

sayde secretly, Happy are
which se that ye sc.

24 For I tell you, that many prophctcs
and kynges have desired to sc thooso
thynges, which ye se, and have nott
scnc them ; and to hcare those thynges,
whych ye heare, and have nott lieardo
them.

25 'And marke !

a ccrtaync lawcro
stode vp, and tempted hym, sayinge.
Master, what shall I do to inhcrct eter-
nal I lyfe 1

26 He sayd vnto him, What ys written

in the luwc; ? howe redest thou 1

27 And h(! uiiHWcred and siiydo, Tliou
shalt love thy Lorde God wyth all thy

;

344

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

tin l^cinamma, yah us
saiwalai
})einai, yali us allai niahtai })cinai, yah
us allai gahugdai [/ciiiai ; yah ucwhuud-
yan J?einana swe |juk silban.

allai

28 j)anuh qaj) du iniina, Raihtaba and-

hoft ; ])ata tawoi, yah libais.

ealre dhire sawle, and of

of
ealluni
clinnni niihtum, and of eallum ct.num
nia'gcne ; and dinne nehstan swa, de
sylfne.

28 Da cwx]) he, I\ihte dii andswarod-

est ; do diet, donne lyfast du.

29 I|) is wilyands uswaurhtana sik
domyan, qaj) du lesua, Au wlias ist
mis ucwhuiidya 1

30 Andhafyands j)an lesus, qaj), Manna
galai)) af lairusaleni in laireikon, yah
in waidedyans fiarann, Jjaiei yah biraub-
odcduu iua, yah banyos analag

.

.

.

29 Da cwa?J) he to dam Haclendc, and
gerihtwisian, And

sylfne

wolde hine
hwylc is min nehsta 1

30 Da cwai|)

se H^elend liine, up-
beseondc. Sum man ferde fiam Hicru-
salem to Hiericho, and becom on da
sceajjan, da hine bereafodon, and tint-
regodon hine, and forleton hine sam-
cucene.

31 Da gebyrode hit, daet sum saccrd
ferde on dam ylcan wege, and, da lie
dait geseah, he hine forbeiih.

32 And eall-swa diacon, da he wa^s
wid da stowe, and da3t geseah, he hyne
eae forbcah.

33 Da ferde sum Samaritanisc man
wid hine ; da he hine geseali, da wearf*
he mid mild-heortnesse ofer hine
a-
styred.
34 Da genealachte he, and wTaj) In's
And
wimda, and on-agcat ele and win.
hine on hys nyten sette, and gchvdde
on hys laece-hiis, and hine lacnode.

3^ And brolite odrum djrjrc tweixon
j)cnegas, and sealdc dam lacce, and dus
cwa^J), Bcgym hys ; and swa hwa?t swa
du mare to-gedest, donne ic cume, ic
hit forgylde de.

36 Ilwylc dara j'reora ]>ync]> dc ^vct sy

divs mjcg, de on da sceajnm bcfcoll ?

37 Da cwa^|> he, Se dc him mild-
Da cwa^J) se Hacl-
heortncsse on dyde.
end, Ga, and do eall-swa.^

38 S6j>licc hit wa's gcwordcn, dii hig

ferdon, se HsGlcnd eode on sum castcl
and sum wif, on naman Martha, onfeng
hyne on h>Te lius.
39 And da^ro swustcr w.ts, Maria, sco
cac sa3t wid da^s llaclcndes fet, and his
word gehyrde.

40 S6])lice Martha geornlice him jxju-

;

X. 28-40.J WYCLIFFE, 1389.
and of al thi soule/ and of alle
tlii
my5tis, and of al thi mynde ; and thi
nei3ebore as thi silf.

TYNDALE, 1526.

345

hert, and wyth all thy soule, and with
all thy strengthe, and with all thy
mynde j and thy neghbour as thy sylfe.

28 And Jhesu seide to him, Thou hast
answerid ri^tly ; do thou this thing, and
thou schalt lyue.

29 Forsothe he willinge to iustifye him
silf, seide to Jhesu, And who is my
nei3ebore 1

30 Sothli Jhesu biholdinge, seide, Sum
man cam doun fro Jerusalem in to Je-
rico, and felde among theuues, whiche
also robbiden him, and, woundis putt
in, wenten awey, the man lefte half
quyk.

31 Forsothe it byfel, that sum prest
cam doun in the same weye, and, him
seyn, passide forth.

32 Also forsoth and a dekene, whanne
he was bisydis the place, and sy5 him,
passide forth.

33 Forsoth sum man Samaritan, mak-
ynge iourney, cam bisydis the weye
and he seynge him, was stirid by mercy.

28 And he sayde vnto hym. Thou hast
answered right ; this do, and thou shalt
live.

29 He willynge to iustifie hym silfe,
sayde vnto Jesus, Who ys then my
neghbour ?
30 Jesus answered, and sayde, A cer-
tayne man descended from Jerusalem
into Jericho, and fell into the hondes off
theves, whych robbed hym off his ray-
ment, and wonded hym, and departed,
levynge hym halfe deed.

31 And yt chaunsed, that there cam a
certayne preste that same waye, and
sawe hym, and passed by.

32 And lyke wyse a levite, when he
was come neye to the place, went and
loked on hym, and passed by.

33 Then a certayne Samaritane, as he
iornyed, cam neye vnto hym ; and be-
helde hym, and had compassion on hym.

34 And he comynge ny^, bond to gidere
his woundis, heeldynge yn oyle and
And he puttinge on his hors,
wyn.
ledde in to a stable, and dide the cure
of him,
35 And another day he brou^te forth
twey pens, and 5af to the kepere of the
stable, and seide, Haue thou the cure
of him ; and what euere thing thou
schalt 3yue ouer, I schal 3elde to thee,
whanne I schal come a^en.

36 Who of thes thre semcth to thee to
haue be nei3cbore to him, that fclde a
mong the thcues 1
37 And he seide, He that dide mercy
And Jhesu scith to him, Go
on him.
thou, and do thou in lyk manerc.

38 Forsoth it was don, while thci

wenten, and he cntridc in to sinn castcl
and sum womman, Martha l)i name,
reccyuodc hinj in to hir Iiouh.

;

39 And to this Mrtrl/ui was a sister,
Mario bi name, which also sittingc by
sydis th(; feet of the Lord, licrde tlic
word of hiiM.

34 And cam to hym, and bounde vppe
hys wondes, and poured in wyne and
oyle. And layed him on his beaste, and
brought hym to a commen hostry, and
drest hym.

35 And on the morowe when he de-
parted he toke out two pence, and gave
them to the host, and said vnto him.
Take cure of him ; and whatsoever thou
spendest above this, when I come agayne,
I will recompence the.

36 Which nowe off these thre thynkcst
thou was neghbour vnto him, that fell
into the theves hondes *?
37 And he answered. He that shewed
Then sayd Jesus vnto
mercy on hym.
hym. Goo, and do thou lyke wyse.

38 Hyt fortuned, as he went, that ho
entred into a certayne toune ; and a
certayne woman, named Martha, receavcd
hym into her liouHse.

39 And this woman had a sister, called
Mari, which sate at Jesus fete, and hcrdo
Jesus preachynge.

40 Forsothe Martha bisycdc aboutc

40 Martha was combrcd about mocho

1

;

34 G

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

Dii stod hco, and cwa^j^, Drilitcn,
ode.
nis t!c nan caru, ctict niin s\\Tister let
me senlyjiige ]>enian 1 sege hjTC, da,'t beo
fylste me.

4

Da cwa'j? sc Hadend, ^lartlia, Mar-
tha, geornfuU du cart, and embe fela
Jjinga gedrefed

42 Gewislice an |)ing is nead-bebcfe.
Maria geceas done selestan dael, se byre
ne ])yj) afyrred.

CnAP. XL I S6})licc wa^s geworden,
da be wa^s on sumere stowe bine ge-
biddende, da da be gcswac,
liim to
cwa'j) an bis leorning-cnibta, Dribten,
Iser us us gebiddan, swa lobannes bis
leorning-cnibtas Iserde.

2 Da ewa'jj be to bim, Cwcdaj? dus,
donne ge eow gebidda}?, U'rc fabler, dii
de on beofone eart, si din nama ge-
Gcwcorde
balijod.
din willa on beofone, and on corjnin.

To-cume din rice.

3 Syle us to-dceg urne diegbwamlican

bidf.

4 And forg}'f us ure gyltas, swa we
forgyfajj ?clcum dara de wid us agylt.
And ne hvd dii us on costnungc, ac alys
us fram yfele.

5 Da cwa^)> be to bim,^Hwylc eowcr
ba'f|) sumne ft'cond, and gce[> to midre
nibte to bim, and cwy|) to bim, La frcond,
bvn mc j>ry blafas ;

6 Fordam min frcond com of wcp^c to
mc, and ic uajbbe bwa^t ic bim toforan
Iccgc.

7 And lie donne bim dus andswarigc,
Ne bco dii me gram ; nu min duru is
beloccn, and mine cnibtas synd on rcste
mid me ; ne mveg ic
arisiui nu, and
syllan de.

8 Gyf be donne jnnln^-unaj^ cnncicndc,
ic cow sccgc, gyf be [nc] jirist and bim
sylj) donne, fordam de be bis frcond ys,
deab bwa'dcrc for bys onbrope be arist,
and syl|) bim bis ncode.

9 Antl ic cow secge, bidda|>, and cow
by); goscald; seca|', and gefinda)); cnuc-
iaji, and eow byj) untyncd.

;

;

1

;

X. 4I.-XL 9.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

347

moche seruyce. Which stood, and seide,
Lord, is it not of charge to thee, that my
sistir lefte me aloone, for to mynystre 1
therfore seye to hir, that she helpe me.

41 And the Lord answeringe seide to
hir, Martha, Martha, thou ert bysi, and
art troublid anentis ful manye thingis

42 Forsoth o thing is necessarie. Marie
hath chose the beste part, which schal
not be take a wey fro hir.

servynge. And stode, and sayde. Master,
doest thou not care, that my sister hath
leeft me to minister alone 1 bid her
therfore, that she helpe me.

4

And Jesus answered and sayde vnto
her, Martha, Martha, thou arte busied,
and troublest thy silfe about many
thynges

42 Verely one ys nedfiill. Mary hath
chosen her a good parte, which shall not
be taken awaye from her.

Chap. XL i And it was don, whanne
he was preiynge in sura place, as he
ceesside, oon of his discipiis seide to
liim, Lord, teche vs to preye, as and
John tau3te his discipiis.

Chap. XI.

i And it fortuned, as he
was prayinge in a certayne place, when
he ceased, won of his disciples sayd vnto
him. Master, teache vs to praye, as Jhon
taught his disciples.

2 And he seide to hem, "Whanne ^e
preyen, seye ^e, Fadir, .... halewid
be thi name.

Thi kyngdom come to .

.

2 And he sayd vnto them, Wlien ye
praye, saye, Oure father which arte in
Lett thy
heven, halowed be thy name.
kyngdom come.
Thy will be fulfillet,
even in erth as it is in heven.

3 5yue to vs to day cure eche dayes

3 Oure dayly breed geve vs this daye.

breed.

4 And for3yue to vs oure synnes, as
and we for3yuen to ech owynge to vs.
And leed not vs in to temptacioun. .

.

.

5 And he seith to hem, Who of 30U
schal haue a frend, and schal go to him
at mydny3t, and schal seie
to him,
Frend, leene to me thre loouys

6 For my frend cometh to me of the
wcye, and I haue not what I schal sette
biforc him.

7 And he withynne forth answeringe
seye, Nyle thou be noyful to me ; the
dore is now schit, and my children both
with me in tlie cowche ;
I may no3t
ryse, and ^yue to thee.

8 And if he schal contynno knockynge,
I seye to 30U, tliou3 he schal not 3yue
to hym, for he is a frend, nethclcs for
liis vnrcfltcfulnesHO ho Hcha! rise, ami 3yue
to hym, how manye he hutli nedcful.

9 And I seic to 30U, axe 30, and it
schal be 3ouun to 30U ; sckc 3c, and 3c
ficluilen fyndc ; knockc 3c, and it schal
be oi)enyd to 30U.

4 And forgeve vs oure synnes, for even
we forgeve every man that traspaseth
vs. And ledde vs not into temptacion,
butt deliver vs from evyll. Amen.

5 And he sayde vnto them. Which of
you shall have a frende, and shall goo
to hym att mydnyght, and saye vnto
hym, Frende, lende me foure loves ;

6 For a frende of myne is come out off
the waye to me, and I have nothynge to
sett before him.

7 And he with in shall andswcr and
saye, Trouble me nott ; nowe is the
dore shctt, and my servaunttcs are with
me in the chamber ; I cannot rysc, and
geve them to the.

8 I saye vnto you, though he woll
not arysc and geve hym, be cause he is
his frende, yet because of hys impor-
tunite ho woll ryse, and geve him, ns
many as he nj^lcth.

9 And I saye vnto you, axe, and yt
soke, and ye shall
shalbo govon you ;
fyiido ; knockc, and it shalbe opened
vnto you.

1

;

348

GOTHIC, z">^.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

10 JFAc dara cte ])itt, onfehj) ; and so
cle secji, he fint ; and cnucicndum by)?
untyned.

1

Hwylc cower bitt his fredcr Idafes,
segst dii syljj he him stan 1 odde gif lie
byt fisces,
for

sylj? he him naeddraii

fisce 1

12 Odde gif he bit fog, segst du nvc}>
he him scorpionem? doet is an ^v^Tm-
cynn.

13 Witodlice gif ge, donne de synd
yfele, cunnon syllan gode sylene cowruni
bearnum, swa mycele ma eower fanler of
heofone 8yl]> godne gast dam de hyne
biddal'."^

14 Da waes se Haelend lit-adrifendc
wa^s
And da he ut-adruf da deofel-
se dumba ; and

sume deofol-seocnesse, and seo
dumb.
seocnesse, da sprsec
da m?enij;eo ^v^mdrcdon.

15 Sume cwaedon, On Belzcbub, deofla
caldre, he lit-adrifp da deofol-seocnessa.

t6 And sume his fandodon and gyrn-

don of heofone tacnes of him.

i7 Da he geseah hyra gejvanciis, he
cw{p|>, JE'lc rice on hyt sylf todaelcd,
by)) toNvorpen, and da^t hus ofer diet
hus fea]j>.

18 Gyf Satanas is todcclcd on hine
Fordam de
sylfne, hu stent his rice 1
ge secgaj), diet ic on Belzcbub deofol-
seocnessa ut-jidrife.

19 Gif ic on Belzcbub deofla ut-adnfc,
For-

on hwam ut-adrifaj> cower bcarni
dam hig beoj) cowere deman.

20 Gewislicc jjif

ic on Godes finjrre
deofla lit-adrife, callunga Godes rice on
cow bccym)).

21 Donne se stranga gcwacpnod his
cafertun gehcalt, donne beoj) on sibbe
da I'iiig de he ah.

22 Gyf donne strengi*a ofer hine cym|)
and hine ofcr-winf>, calle his wsppnu, do
he on-triiwode, he him afyr[), and todacl|>
his here-rcaf.

23 Se de nis mid me, se is ongean me
and se de ne gadcraj) mid me, se liit
tostret.

24 Donne se unclacna gast ga5j) of dam
jnirh unwa^terige stowa,

men, he gaej)

6
2
1
1

;

9
2

XL 10-24.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

349

TO Forsotli ech man that axith, takitli

and he that sekith, fynclith ; and to a
man knockynge, it schal be openyd.

1

Therfore who of 50U axith the fadir
breed, wher he schal 3yue to him a stoon 1
ether if he axith fysch, wher he schal
5yue to him a serpent for the fysch 1

1

Ethir if he schal axe an ey, whethir

I o For every one that axeth, receaveth ;
and he that seketh, fyndeth ; and to him
that knocketh, shall it be opeuned.

II Yf the Sonne axe breed off eny off
you which ys hys father, wyll he proffer
hym a stone ? or yff he axe fisshe, wyll
he geve hym a serpent 1

1

Or yf he axe an egge, wyll he proffer

he schal dresse to him a scorpioun 1

him a scorpion 1

T 3 Therfore if 5e, whanne 5e ben yuele,
kunne 5yue to 50ure children goode
thingis 50uun, hou moclie more 50ure
fadir of heuene schal 3yue a good spirit
to men axynge him.

14 And Jhesu was castinge out a fend,
and he was doumbe. And whanne he
hadde cast out the fend, the doumb man
spak ; and the cumpanyes wondriden.

13 Yf ye then, which are evyll, know
howe to geve good giftes vnto youre
chyldren, howe moche more shall youre
father celestiall geve a goode sprete to
them that desire it of hym.

14 And he was a

castynge out a
devyll, whyche was dom. And it folowed
when the devyll was gone out, the dom
spake j and the people wcndred.

15 Forsoth summe of hem seiden, In
Belsebub, prince of deuelis, he castith
out deuelis.

1

And othere temptinge axiden of him

a tokene fro heuene.

17 Forsoth he, as he sy^ the thou^tis
of hem, seide to hem, Euery rewme de-
silf, schal be desolat,
partide a3ens it
and an hous schal falle on an hous.

18 Forsoth and if Sathanas is departid
a3ens him silf, how schal his rewme
stonde] For 3e seyn, that I caste out
fendis in Belsebub.

19 Forsoth if I in Belsebub caste out
fendis, in whom 3oure sones casten out 1
Therfore thei schulen be joure domes-
men.

20 Forsoth if I caste out fendis in the
fyngir^ of God, sothli the rewme of God
is corncn in to 30U.

2

Whanne a strong armed man kepith
his hows, alio thingis that he weldith
ben in pocs.

22 Sothli if a strongcre comynge aboue
oucrcome him, ho sclial take a woy alle
his armcris, in whiche he tristidc, and
gclml dele abrood his 8})uylis.

23 He that is not with mc, is a3cns
me ; and he that gedrith not to giderc
witl) nic, scatcrith a brood.

24 Whanne an vnclcne spirit hath gon
out of a man, he wandrith by drye placis,

15 Some off them sayde, He casteth
out devyls by the power of Belzebub,
the chefe of the devyls.

16 And other tempted hym sekynge of

hym a signe from heven.

17 He knewe their thoughtes, and
sayde vnto them, Every kyngdom at
debate with .in it silfe, shalbe desolate,
and won housse shall fall apon another.

18 Soo if Satan be at variaunce with
in hym silve, howe shall his kyngdom
endure 1 Be cause ye saye, that I cast
out devyls by the power off Belzebub.

1

Yf I by the power of Belzebub caste
oute devyles, by whose power do youre
chyldren cast them out 1
Therfore shall
they be youre iudges.

20 Butt if I with the finger off God
cast out devyls, noo doute the kyngdom
of God is come apon you.

21 When a stroufxc man armed watch-
cth his housse, that he possesseth is in
peace.

22 But when a stronger then he comcth
apon liym and ovcrcommcth hym, he
taketh from him his harnes, wherin he
trusted, and devideth his gooddes.

23 He that is not with me, is agaynst
me ; and he that gadercth nott with me,
scattcich.

24 Wiien the vnclcnc sprete is gone
out of a man, he walkcth tlirough water-

350

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

rcste seccndc ; and nane ne gcniet,
donnc cwyjj he, Ic geweude eft to imu-
um huse, de ic of-eode.

25 And dfenne he cymj), lie hit gemet

a^nitig mid besmum afeonnod.

26 Donne gsej) lie, and nini|> seofcn
odre gastiis wyrsan donne he, and in-
Donne synd daes
gaj), and dar eardiaj).
maunes endas wyrsan dam aerrum,

27 S6[)Hce WKS geworden, da he d's
ssede, sum wif .... him to cwivji,
Eadig is se inno)> de do bier, and da
breost de dii suce.

28 Da cwre}) he, Eadige synd da, de
Godes word gehyraj), and da^t gehealda}>.

29 Da liyra manega toganlere conion,
he cwa'|> to him, Deos ciieorys is man-
full cueorys ; heo sec|> tacen, and hyre
ne bi]j nan geseald, buton lonan tacen.

30 Swa swa lona wses tacen Niniuet-
um, swa ])']]> mannes sunu tiieen disse
cneorisse.

3 r Su|)-d8eles cwen arist on dome mid
disse cneorysse mannum, and genydera})
hig ; fordam de heo com of eor|)an
endum, to gehyranne Salomones wis-
des is mara donne
dom, and efnc !
Salomon,

32 Niniuetisce men arisaj) on dome
mid disse
cneorysse, and geiiyderiaj>
hig ; fordam de hig dtvd-bote tlydon a-t
lonam bodunge, and des is mara donne
lona.
33 Ne on-tcl)) nan man his leoht-fa't,
and sett on diglum, ne under bydene,
ac ofer candel-stajf, dajt da de in-gii|),
leolit goscon.

34 i)in cage is dines lichaman Icoht-
gif din cage bi|) hluttor, donne
gif hit by|>

f;vt ;
bij) call din l-'eliania beorht ;
deorc, call din lichama by}) })ystre.

35 Warna, da3t da^t leoht de de on is,

ne syn |>ystru.

36 Gyf din lichama call

bi|> beorht,
and na'f)) nanne dael j^ystra, donne byj)

XI. 25-36.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

351

1

sekinge reste ; and he fyndynge not,
seith, I sclial turue a5en in to myn houS;
wher of I cam out.

25 And whanne he schal come, he
fyndith it clensid with beesmes, and
ourned.

26 Thanne he goth, and takith with
him seuene othere spiritis werse than
him silf, and thei gon yn, dwellen there.
And the laste thinofis of that man ben
maad worse than the formere.

27 Forsoth it was don, whanne he
seide thes thingis, sum womman of the
cumpany reysinge hir vois, seide, Blessid
he the wombe that bar thee, and blessid
be the teetis whiche thou hast sokun.

28 And he seide, Eathere blessid hen
tliat heeren Goddis word, and

thei,
kepen it.

29 Forsothe the cumpanye comynge to
gidere, he bigan to seye, This genera-
cioun is a weyward generacioun ;
it
sekith a tokene, and a tokene schal not
be 30uun to it, no but the tokene of
Joonas, the prophete.

30 For whi as Joonas was a tokene to
men of JSTynyue, so mannis sone schal
be to this generacioun.

31 The queene of the south schal ryse
in dom with men of this generacioun,
and schal condempne hem ;
for sche
cam fro the endis of the erthe, to heere
the wysdom of Salomon, and lo ! here
is more than Salomon.

32 Men ot Nynyue schulen ryse in
dom with this generacioun, and schulen
condempne it ; for thei didcn penaunce
at the prechinge of Joonas, and lo ! here
is more than Joonas.
33 No man li^tiicth a lanternc, and
puttitli in liidlis, other vndir a boyschcl,
but on a candel sticke, that thei that
gon.yn, sc li3t.

34 The lanternc of thi body is thin
if thin y^e schal be symplc, al thi
y5c ;
body Hclial be li^tful ; forsoth if it schal
be weyward, also
thi body schal be
derkful.

I esse places, sekynge reest ; and when he
fyndeth none, he sayeth, I will returne a-
gayne vnto my housse, whence I cam out.
25 And when he commeth, he fyndeth

it swept, and garnisshed.

26 Then goeth he, and taketh seven
spretes with hym worsse then
other
hym silfe, and they enter in, and dwell
And the ende off that man is
there.
worsse then the begynnynge.

27 Hit fortuned, as he thus spake, a
certayne woman of the company lyfte vp
her voyce, and sade vnto hym, Happy
is the wombe that bare the, and the
pappes which gave the sucke.

28 Butt he sayde, Happy are they,
that heare the worde off God, and kepe

it.

29 When the people wer gadered thicke
to geder, he began to saye. This is an
evyll nacion ; they seke a signe, and
there shall noo signe be geven them,
but the signe off Jonas, the prophet.

30 For as Jonas was a signe to the
Ninivites, so shall the sonne off man be
to this nacion.

3

The quene off the southe shall ryse
at the iudgement with the men of this
generacion, and condempne them ; for
she cam from the ende of the worlde, to
heare the wisdom of Solomon, and be-
holde ! a greater then Solomon is here.
32 The men off Ninivite shall ryse at
the iudgement with
generacion,
and shall condempne them ; for they re-
pented at the preachynge of Jonas, and
beholde ! a greater then Jonas is here.

this

33 Noo man lighteth a candell, and
putteth it in a preve place, nether vnder
a busshel, butt on a candelstickc, that
they that come in, maye se light.

34 The light off thy body is thyne eye ;
therforc when thyn eye is single, tlien is
all thy body full off light ; butt if thync
eye be; evyll, then shall all thy body bo
full off darkncs.

35 Tlierfore so thou, lest the li3t wliich

35 Take hed(; therforc, thatt the light

is in thee, be derkncs.sis.

whiche is in the, be nott darkncs.

36 Therforc if al thi body schal be H3t-
fiil, not hauyngc ony part of dcrkncssis,

36 For if all thy body shalbe light,
liavyngc noo parte darke, then shall all

352

GOTHIC. 3^o-

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[^'f- L^'ke

he call bcorht, and de on lyht swa d«t
leoht-ftut daiS lig-raesces."^

.

. Da baid hine sum Fariseisc
37 .
man, ilxt he a*te mid him. And he
in-code, and stet.
38 Da ongan se Fariscisca on him
smeai^an, and cwedan, hwi he ge))wogcii
naGre ser his gereorde.
39 Da cwsej) Drihten to him, Nil ge
Farisei dait ute is calicos and discos
diet eow innan is, da;t is
geclaensiat) ;
full reallaces and unrihtwisnesse.

40 La dysegan, hu ne worhte dset da?t
inue is, se de worhte daet lite is 1

41 Deah hwredere da?t to lilfc is, sylla})
ifilmessan, donne beoj? eow ealle |)ing
claene.

42 Ac wa eow, Fariscum, ge do toudia|>
mintau, and rudan, and aclce wyrte, and
Das
ge forbugaj) dora and Godcs lufc.
|)in<' eow gebyrode to donne, and da
|)ing ne fori a? tan.

43 Wa eow, Fariseum, go de lufiaj' da
forman heah-setl on gosamnungum, and
gretinga on straetum.
44 Wa eow,
fordam do go
synd swylce da byrgena, de man innau
ne sceawa|>, and da men nyton de him
on-ufan ga|>.
45 Da andswarodo him sum a'-L,doaw,
Lareow, teonau dii wyrcst us, mid disse
sage.

46 Da cwre)) he, W^i eow ac-gleawum,
fordam de ge 8yma|> men mid dam
byrdcnum de hig libcran ne magon,
and ge ne ahrina^ da soamas mid cow-
rum anum fingre.
47 Wa eow, ge do timbriaj) witc^cna
byrgena ; cower ficdcnis hig ofslogon.

48 Eallunga ge cyda|i, and gc |>arial>
cower fanlom woorcum ; fordam hig
ofslogou hig, and ge timbria[) hira byr-
gena.

49 Fordam cwa^j) Godcs wisdom, Ic
scndc to him wftcgan, and apostolas,
and hig ofslcaj^ hig and ehtaj).

;

XI. 37-49.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

353

it sclial be al li^tful, and as a lanterne of
bri^tnesse it schal ^yue li^t to thee.
37 And wlianne he spak, sum Pharisee
praiede, that he schulde ete at hym.
And he gon yn, saat to the mete.

38 Sothli the Pharisee bigan to seie,
gessynge with ynne him silf, whi he was
not waischun byfore the mete.
39 And the Lord seith to him, Now ^e
Farisees clensen that thing that is with
outenforth of the kuppe and plater
but that tiling of 50U that is with ynne,
is ful of raueyn and wickidnesse.

40 Foolis, wher he that made that
thing that is with oute forth, made not
also that thing that is with ynne *?

41 Netheles that thing that is ouer,^
3yue 3e almes, and lo ! alle thingis ben
clene to 30U.

42 But woo to 50U, Pharisees, that
tythen mynte, and ruwe, and al wort,^
and passen dom and the charite of God.
Forsoth it bihofte to do thes thingis,
and not for to leeue hem.

43 Woo to 50U, Pharisees, that louen
the firste chaieris in synagogis, and salu-
taciouns in cheping.

44 Woo to 50U,
that ben as
sei)ulcris, whiche apperyn not, and men
wulkynge aboue witeu not.

45 Forsoth con of the wyse men of
lawe rnsweringe, seide to him, Maistir,
thou seyiuge thes thingis, doist disj:)it
also to vs.

46 He seide, And woo to 50U, wyse
men of lawe, for ^e chargen men with
birthins whiche thei moun not here, and
3e 30U silf with ^ourc o fynger touchcn
not the hcuynessis.
47 Woo to 30U, that bilden birielis of
forsoth 3oure fadris slowen

j)roplietis ;

lieni.

48 Trculy 3c witncsscn, tliat 3e con-
scnten to the werkis of 3oure fadris ; for
sotidi tliei slowen hem, but 3e bildou
her sepulcris.

49 'J herforc and tlie wysdom of God
seide, I schal sende to hem proj)hctis,
and apostlis, and of hem thei schulen
alee and pursue,

be full off light, even as when a can dell
doeth light the with his brightnes.
37 And as he spake, a certayne Pharise
besought hym to dyne with hym. And
Jesus went in, and sate doune to meate.
38 When the Pharise sawe that, he
marveylled, that he had nott wessched
before dynner.
39 And the Lorde sayde to hym, Nowe
Pharises make clene the out-
do ye
syde of the cuppe and of the platter
but youre inwarde parties are full of
raveninge and wickednes.

40 Ye foles, did not he that made that
which is with out, make that which is
within alsool

41 Neverthelesse ye geve of that that
all is clene to

ye have, and beholde !
you.

42 But wo be to you, Pharises, for ye
tythe the mynt, and rewe, and all man-
ner erbes, and passe over iudgment and
These ought ye to
the love of God.
have done, and nott to have left the
other ondone.
43 Wo be to you, Pharises, for ye love
the vppormost seates in the sinagoges,
and gretynges in the markettes.
44 Wo be to you, scribes and Pharises,
ypocrites, for ye are as graves, which
apere not, and men that walke over
them are nott ware of them.

45 Then answered one of the lawears,
and sayd vnto hym. Master, thus say-
inge, thou puttest vs to rebuke also.

46 Then he sayde. Wo be to you also,
ye laweras, for ye lade men with bur-
thens greveous to be borne, and ye youre
selves touche nott the packes with one
of youre fingers.
47 Wo be to you, that bilde the sepul-
cres off the prophetes ; for youre fathers
kiled them.

48 Triicly ye bcare witnes, tluit ye
alovve the dedes of youre fathcjs ;
for
tliey killed them, and ye bilde their
sepulcj-es.

49 Therforc sayde the wisdom off God,
I will send them ])ro])h<'tcH, und apostles,
jiiid oil" them they shall alee and perse-
cute,

A a

354

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

50 Dcft calra witcgcna blod sy gesoht,
de waes aj^oteii of niiddan-'^cardes frum-
an, fram disse cneorysse ;

51 Fram Abeles bl5de od Zacharian
blod, se forwearj) betweox dam altare
and dam temple.
Ic cow 8ccgc swa,
bi]> gesoht fram disse cneorysse.

52 Wa eow, se-gleawum, fordam de ge
setbrudou da3S in-gehydes csege ; ge in
ne eodon, and ge forbudon da de iu-
eodon.
53 Da he him dis to cwfv}), da on-
gunnon da Farisei and da aiz-glcawaa
liefilicc him agen standan, and his muj)
dyttan,

54 And embe Line syrwan, secende
sum })ing of his mu])e, diet hig hine
>vi'egdon.

Chap. XIL

i Mycelum ^vcrcdum
him embe standendum, da^t hig hine
trivdon, da cwjpJ) he to his leorning-
cnihtum, AVarnial) wid Farisea larc, daet
is licctung.

2 S6}>lice nis niin ]jing ofer-hcled, de
nc beo un-heled ; ne behydd, da.'t nc sy
witen.

3 Fordam de d.Tt ge sccga)> on j^yst-
mm, bco}> on leohte sa?de ; and diut ge
on eaiiim spraccum on bedd-cofum, bij)
on hrofum bodod.

4 Ic sccge cow, minum freondum, nc
beo ge bregede fram dam de done
lichaman ofsleab, and nabba]) syddan
hwait hig ma don.

f; Ic cow votywc, hwa^nc gc ondrafdon ;
adricilaj) done, dc anwoald liafj), syddan
lie ofslyh)?, on helle ascndau.
i3us ic
cow secge, adracda}? done.

6 Ne becypaj) hig fif spearwan to
holflinge ; and an nis of dam ofergytcn
bcforan Gode ?

7 Ac ealle eowTcs hcafdes loccas synd
getealde. Ne adracde gc eow ; ge synd

1

1

;

XI. 50.-XII. 7.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

355

50 That the blood of alle prophetis,
that was sched out fro the makyng of
the world, be sou3t of this generacioun ;

5

Fro the blood of Abel til to the
blood of Zacharie, which perischide by-
So I seie
twix the auter and the hous.
to 50U, it schal be sou3t of this genera-
cioun.

52 Woo to 50U, wyse men of lawe, for
5e han take awey the keye of kunnynge ;
5e 50U silf entriden not, and ^e han for-
boden hem that entriden.

53 Sothli whanne he spak thes thingis
to hem, Pharisees and wyse men of lawe
bigunnen greuously to a^enstonden, and
oppresse his mouth of many thingis,

54 Aspiynge him, and sekinge to take
of his mouth, that thei

sum thing
schulden accuse him.

50 That the bloud off all the prophettes,
which was sheed from the begynnynge
off the worlde, maye be requyred off this
generacion

5

From the bloud of Abel vnto the
bloud off Zacary, whiche perisshed bi-
twene the aulter and the temple. Verely
I saye vnto you, it shalbe requyred of
this nacion.
52 Wo be to you, lawears, for ye have
taken awaye the kaye of knowledge ; ye
entred not in youreselves, and them that
came in ye forbade.
53 When he thus spake vnto them, the
lawears and the Pharises began to wexe
busy about hym, and to stoop his mougth
with many questions,

54 Layinge wayte for hym, and sech-
ynge to catclie some thyng of his mought,
wherby they myght accuse hym.

Chap. XII.

i Sotheli manye cum-
panyes stondinge aboute, so that thei
troden ech othir, he bigan to seie to his
disciplis. Be ^e war of the sourdow3 of
Pharisees, which is ypocrisye.

2 Forsoth no thing is hilid, which schal
not be schewid ; nether hid, that schal
not be wist.

3 Forwhi tho thingis that ^e han seyd
in derknessis, schulen be seid in li^t ;
and this that 3e han spoken in eere in
the cowchis, schal be prechid in rooues.

4 Forsothe I seie to 50U, my frendis,
be 3c not a fcerd of hem that slen the
l;0(ly, and aftir thes thingis han no more
what tliei schulen don,

5 Sothli I schal schewe to 30U, whom
30 Hchulcn drede ; drcdo 3e him, which
aftir that lie hath slayn, hath j)owcr to
So I scic to 30U,
Hende in to hellc.
dredc 30 hym.

6 Wher fmc sparrowis ben not secld
for twcync halpens ; and oon of hem is
not in for3(;tiiig l)ifore (iod ?

7 Jiiit and ailc the hccris of 30urc heed
Thcrforc nylc 30 dredc ;

ben noumbrid.

Chap. XII.

i As there gadered to-
gedther an innumerable multitude off
people, in so moche that they trood won
another, he began to saye vnto his dis-
ciples, Fyrst of all beware of the leven
off the Pharises, which is ypocrysy.

2 For there is nothynge covered, that
nether hid,

shall not be vncovered ;
that shall not be knowen.

3 Wherfore whatsoever ye have spoken
in darknes, that same shalbe hearde in
light ; and that which ye have spoken
in the eare even in secret places, shalbe
preached even on the toppe of the
housses.
4 I saye vnto you, my frendes, feare
ye not them that kyll the body, and
after that have nothynge that he can
moare do.
5 I will shcwe you, whom ye shall
feare hym, which after lie hath
feare ;
kyllcd, hath power to cast in to hell.
Ye I saye vnto you, hym feare.

6 Are nott five sparowcs bought for
two farthynges ; and none off them is
forgotten of Ood ?

7 Ye the very heers of youre heed are
Feurc nott therfore ; ye arc

nombred.

A Jl 2

2
1

3r)0

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

beteran manegum spearwum.

8 S6|)lice ic eow secge, swa hwylc swa
me andet beforan maunura, clone man-
iies sunu andet beforan Godes engluni.

9 Se de me wid-saec)) beforan man-
num, se by}> wid-sacen beforan Godes
englum.

TO And selc de segj) aenig word agen
mannes sunu, dam bi|) foriryfon ; dam
de widcr-sacaj) ongean llaligne Gust,
ne bi)? dam forgyfen.^

1

Donne hig Isedaj) cow on gcsam-
nunga, and to dugode-caldi-um, and to
anwealdum, ne beo ge embe-|?encende,
hu odde hwset ge sprecon, odde and-
swarion.

1

Halig Gast eow lser|j on daere tide,

da jjing de eow sprecan gebyra}).

13 Da cwoej) sum of dam menegum,
Lareow, sege minum breder, diet be
dsele unccr sehta wid me.

14 Da cwaej) be. La! man, bwa sette

me deman, odde dseleud, ofer inc 1

15 T>Ci cwvo]) be, Gymaj^, and warnia})
wid selce gytsunge ;
fordani de nys
nanes mannes lif on gytsunge of dam
de he all.

16 Da ssede he him sum bigspel,
Sumes web'gcs mannes rocer brohte for|>
irode w.-vstnins.

17 Da jiobte lie on him sylfuni, and
cwaej), Hwtet do ic, fordam ic na^bbe
hwyder ic mine wrestmas gadrige 1

18 Da cw8p|) he, Dus ic do; ic toweorpe
mine bernu, and ic wyrcc maran, and ic
gadorige dydcr call da>t me gowexen
ys, and mine god.

19 And ic secge minre sawlo, Eala
sawel, dii lia'fst mycele gt'd asettc to
manegum gearum ; gercst de, et, and
drinc, and gewista.

20 Da c\va^j> God to him, La dysega,
on disse nihte hig fecca}) dine sawle

4
7

;

6

XII. 8-20.] WYCLIFFE, F389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

357

5e ben of more priys than many spa-
rowis.

8 Treuli I seie to 50U, ech ^lan which
euer schal knowleche me byfore men,
and mannis sone schal knowleche him
bifore the aungelis of God.

9 Forsoth he that schal denye me bifor
men, schal be denyed bifore the aungelis
of God.

10 And ech man that seith a word
a3ens the sone of man, it schal be for-
5ouun to him ;
sothli it schal not be
for30uim to him, that blasfemeth a3ens
the Hooly Gost.

11 Forsoth whanne thei schulen leede
50U in to synagogis, and to magestatis,
and to potestatis, nyle ^e be bisy, how
ether what ^e schulen answere, ether
what 56 schulen seye.

12 Forsoth the Hooly Gost schal teche
30U in that our, what it bihoueth 30U to
seye.

13 Forsoth sum man of the cumpany
seith to him, Maistir, seie to my bro-
that he departe with me the
ther,

eritage.

1

And he seyde to him, A ! man, who
ordeyned*e me domesman, ether departer,
on 30U ]

15 And he seyde to hem, Se ^e, and
be 3e war of al auarice ; for the lyf of a
man is not in the haboundanse of tho
thingis whiche he weldith.

16 Sothli he seide to hem a liknesse,
seiynge, The feeld of sura riche man
Drou3te forth plcnteuous fruytis.

1

And he thou3te 'vvith ynne him silf,
seyinge, What schal I do, for I haue
Dot whidir I schal gedere my fruytis ?

18 And he seith, I schal do this thing
I schal distrye my bernis, and I schal
make grettcrc, and thidir I sclial gedere
alle thingis that growen to me, and allc
my goodis.

19 And I schal seye to my houIc, Soule,
thou hast many goodis k('])t in to ful
manye 3eeris ; rcste tliou, etc, drynkc,
and etc thou plentciiously.

20 Sothli God Hcidc to liini, Fool, in
this ny3t thei schulen axe of thcc tlii

moare oflf value then many sparowes.

8 I saye vnto you, whosoever con-
fesseth me before men, even hym shall
the Sonne off man confesse also before
the angels of God.

9 And he that denyeth me before men,
off

shalbe denyed before the angels
God.

I o And whosoever speaketh a worde
agaynste the sonne of man, itt shalbe
butt vnto hym thatt
forgeven hym ;
blasphemeth the Holy Goost, it shall
not be forgeven.

I I When they brynge you into their
sinagoges, and vnto their rulers, and
officiers, take noo thought, how or what
thynge ye shall answere, or what ye
shall speake.

12 For the Holy Goost shall teache
you in the same houre, what ye ought
to saye.

13 Won off the company sayde vnto
hym, Master, bid my brother devide
the enherytaunce with me.

14 And he sayde vnto hym, Man ! who .
made me a iudge, or a devider, over
you?

15 And be sayde vnto them. Take
hede, and beware off coveteousnes ; for
no mannes life stondeth in the habound-
aunce of the thynges which he pos-
sesseth.

1

And he put forth a similitude vnto
them, sayinge. The londes of a certayne
man brought forth frutes plenteously,

17 And he thought in hym silfc,
sayinge, Whatt shall
because
I have noo roume where to bcstowc
my frutes 1

do,

I

18 And he sayde, This will I do ;

I
destroye my barncs, and l)ildc
will
greater, and ther in will I gadder all
my fruetcs, and all my goodcs.

19 And I will saye to my soule, Soule,
thou liaste moch goodcs laydc vp in
take thync
stoore
case, eatc, di-ynkc, and be mcry.

for many ycarcs ;

20 l>ut God suydc vnto hym, ^J'hou
folc, this nyght will they fctchc awayo

338

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

;
;

fram de.
gegearwodest ?

Hwaes beoj) da jjing, de dii

21 Swa is se de him sylfum stryn|>,

and nis welig mid Gode.

22 Da cwsej) he to his leoming-cniht-
um, Fordara ic eow secge, ne beo ge
ymbe-hydige eo^vre sawle, hwaet ge eton,
ne eowrum lichamau, hwiet ge sciy-
don.

23 Seo sawcl ys ma donne sc lichama

and se lichama ma donne da?t rcaf.

24 Besceawia|j da hrefnas, daft hig no
sawa}>, ne ne npa|>, naljba|) hig heddcrn,
Da3S de ma
ne bern, ac God hig fett.
ge synd hyra selran 1

25 Hw}'lc cower ma?g })encende ican

ane ehie to his anlicnesse ?

26 Gyf ge da't Ltsse ne magon, hwi
ymbc-

synd ge be odrum jjingum
hydige ?

27 Sceawiaj) da lilian, hu hi wexa|>

hi ne swinca}), ne ne spinna|i.
So}i]ice
ic eow secge, da^t Salomon on calluni
his wuldre naes gescrydd swa dissa an.

28 G}'f God scrytt daet hig, de is to-
dseg on secere, and to-morgen forscrincj)
swii mycele ma God scryt eow ge-
hwccdes geleafiin 1

29 And nolle ge secean, hwnct ge eton,
and uc bco ge up-

odde drincon ;
ahafcnc.

30 Eallc das |>ing j>eoda seceaj^; cower

feeder wat, daet ge discs bclmrfon.

31 Dcah hwanlere sccea|> Godcs rice,

and callc diis |)ing eow bco|> gc-ihtc.

32 Ne ondranl du dc, la lytic heord,
fordam eo^>Tum faider gclicodc cow rice
syllan.

a^lmcssan.

33 Sylla}) diet ge agon, and sylla|>
Wyrcca|> scodas da de ne
gold-hord
forealdigca)',
on hcofenum, dyder |)eof ne gencalaec|>,
ne mo|)j>e nc gcwcmj^.

ungetcorodne

34 Dar cower gold-hord is, dar byj>

cower heorte.^

1

;

XII. 21-34.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE,i526.

359

soule. Forsothe whos scbulen tho tliingis
be^ wliiche thou hast maad redy ?

21 So is he that tresourith to him silf,

and is not ryche in God.

22 And he seide to his disciplis, Ther-
fore I seie to 50U, nyle 50 be bisy to
5oure lyf, what ^e schulen ete, nethir to
3oure body, with what ^e schulen be
clothid.

thy soule agayne from the. Then whose
shall thoose thynges be, which thou hast
provided 1

2

So is itt with hym thatt gaddreth

ryches, and is not ryche in God.

22 And he spake vnto his disciples,
Therfore I saye vnto you, take no
tought for youre lyfe, what ye shall
eate, nether for youre body, what ye
shall putt on.

23 The lyf is more than mete, and the

23 The Ijfe is moore then meate, and

body more than clothing.

24 Biholde 56 crowis, for thei sowen
not, nether repen, to whiche is no celer,
beerne, and God fedith hem.
nether
How myche more ^e ben of more prys
than thei.

25 Forsothe who of 50U bythenkynge

may adde o cubite to his stature 1

26 Therfore if ^e mown not this that
is the leeste, what ben ^e bisy of othere
thingis 1

27 Biholde 36 lilies of the feeld, how
thei wexen ; thei trauelen not, neither
spynnen.
Sothly I seye to 50U, for
nether Salomon in al his glorie was
clothid as oon of these.

28 Forsothe if God clothith thus the
hey, which to day is in the feeld, and to
morwe is sent in to a furneys ; how
moche more 30U of litel feith]

29 And nyle 50 seke, what 30 schulen
ete, ethir what 3e schulen drynke j and
nyle 3e be reysid in to an hi3.

30 Forsoth folkis of the world seken
sothli 30ure fadir

alle thes thingis ;
woot, for 36 neden thes thingis.

3 r Nethelccs seke 3c first the kyngdom
of God, and alle thes thingis schulen be
cast to 30U.

32 Nyle 3e, litil

floe, drcde, for it
plcside to 3oure fadir to 3yuc to 30U a
kyngdom.

33 Si lie 30 tho thingis that 3c wclden,
Make 3c to 30U
and 3yuc 3c almcs.
sacljcls that wexen not oldc, trcsour not
failinge in hcuenes, whidur a thcef ney3-
eth not, neythcr mow3te distryctli.

the body is moore then rayment.

24 Marcke wele the ravens, for they
nether sowe, nor repe, which nether
have stoore housse, ner barne, and yet
God fedeth them. Howe moche are ye
better then the foules ?

25 Which of you with takynge tought

can adde to his stature won cubytt 1

26 Yf ye then be nott able to do that
thynge which is least, why take ye
thought for the remnaunt ?

27 Consydere the lylies, howe they
growe ; they laboure nott, they sj^yn
not. And I saye vnto you, Solomon in
all his royalte was nott clothed lyke
vnto one of these.

28 Yf God then soo cloth the grasse,
which is to daye in the feldes, and to
morowe shalbe cast into the fornace
howe moche moore wyll he clothe you,
o ye endued with litell faith ?

29 And axe nott, what ye shall eate,
or what ye shall drynke ; nether clyme
ye vp an hye.

30 For all suche thynges the hethen
people of the worlde seke for ; youre
father knoweth, that ye have nede off
suche thynges.

31 Wlierfore seke ye after the kyng-
dome off hcven, and all these thynges
shalbe ministred vnto you.

32 Feare not, litell floocke, for it is
youre fiithers pleasure to gcve you a
kyngdom.

33 Sell that ye have, and geve almes.
And make you buggos whicli wcxc noot
olde, and treasure that faylcth nott in
heven, where noo thcfo commeth, nether
moth corrupteth.

34 Forsothe where tlii tresour is, there

34 For will re youre treasure ys, there

also thin herte schal be.

will youre hertes be also.

3r)0

GOTFIIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

35 Sin cower lendenu bcgyrdc, and

leoht-fatu byrncnde ;

36 And beo gclice dam mannum de
Ijyra lilafordes ablda}i, hwaenne he sy
fram gj-ftum gecyrred, da^t big him
sona ontynon, donne he cymj), and

cniica|>.

hlaford

wajccende

37 Eadige synd da |>eowas, do se
he
ic eow secge, djet he
cymj?.
bcgyrt hine, and dv]) daet hig sitta}?,
and gangende him Jjcuaj?.

gcmet, donne

S6})lice

38 And gif he cym\> on dare a^ftcran
waeccan, odde on da3re |)riddan, and dus
gemet, eadige synd da j^eowas.

39 Wita|>, dset gif se hiredcs ealdor
wiste, hwa^nne se j)eof cuman wolde,
witodlice he wacode, and ne gejjafode
dset man his bus undcr-dulfe.

40 And beo gc wapre, fordam de man-
nes sunu cymJ), daere tide de ge ne
wenaj).

41 Da cwa^}> Pctnis, Drihten, scgst dii
dis bigspell to us, hwa>dcr de to cal-
hmi ?

42 Da cwpe}> Drihten, Hwa, wrnst du,
dcTt ys getrywe and glcaw dilitncre,
da3ne se hlaford geset ofer his hired,
da^t he him hwaetes gemet on timan
sylle 1

43 Eadig is se |?cow, de his hlaford

gemet dus dondne, donne he cym|>.

44 S6j)lice ic secge eow, dffit he gesett

hine ofer call da3t he ah.

45 Gyf donne sc j'cow cwy}) on hys
hcortan, Min hlaford ufora)> hys cyme ;
and agynj) beatan da cnihtas, and da
)?inena, and ctan, and drincan, and boon
ofer-drunocn,

46 Donne cymj) da^s J>eowan hhiford,
on dam da>go de he ne wcnji, and da^ro
tide de ho niit ; and toda?lj) hine, and
sett his dsel mid dam ungctreowum.

47 S6|ilice done jhjow de his hl.-ifordcs
wilhin wiste, and ne dyde aifter his

XIL 35-47-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1K26.

361

35 Be 5oure leendes gird by fore, and

lanternes brennynge in 5oure hondis ;

36 And be ^e lyk to men abydinge her
j lord, whanne he schal turne a3en fro
weddingis, that whanne he schal come,
and knocke, anoon thei opene to him.

37 Blessid hen tho seruauntis, whiche
whanne the Lord schal come, he schal
fynde wakynge.
Treuli I seie to 50U,
that he schal bifore girde him, and he
schal make hem to sitte at the mete,
and he passinge schal mynystre to hem.
38 And if he schal come in the secunde
wakyng, and yf he schal come in the
thridde wakynge, and schal fynde so,
tho seruauntis ben blessid.

39 Forsoth wite ^e this thing, for if an
hosebonde man wiste, in what our the
theef wolde come, sothli he schulde
wake, and not suflfre his hous to be
mynyd.

40 And be 56 redy, for in what our ^e

gessen not, mannis sone schal come.

4 J Forsothe Petre seith to him, Lord,
seist thou this parable to vs, ether to
allel

42 Sothli the Lord seide, Who, gessist
thou, is a feithful dispender, and pru-
dent, whom the lord ordeynede on his
meyne, that he 5yue to hem in tyme a
mesure of whete ?

43 Blessid

seruaunt, whom
whanne the lord schal come, he schal
fynde doynge so.

is that

44 Verili I seie to 30U, for on alio
thingis which he weldith, he schal or-
deyne him.

45 Tliat if tliilke seruaunt schal seye
in his hcrte, My lord makith turiynge to
come ; and bigynne to smytc children,
and handmaydcns, and etc, and drynkc,
and bo fillid ouer mesure,

46 Tlic lord of that seruaunt schal
come, in the day that he ho])ith not,
atid our that he wot not ; and schal
dcpartc him, and schal putte his i)art
with vufcithful men.

47 Forsothe thilkc seruaunt that knew
the willc of his lord, and made not biin

35 Lett youre loynes be gerdde about,

and youre lightes brennynge ;

36 And ye youre selves lyke vnto men
that watche for their master, when he
woll returne from a weddynge, that as
sone as he commeth, and knocketh, they
maye open vnto hym.
37 Happy are thoose servauntes, which
their Lorde when he commeth, shall
fynde wakynge. Verely I saye vnto you,
he will gerdde hym silfe about, and make
them sitt doune to meate, and walke by
them and minister vnto them.

38 And yf he come in the seconde
watche, ye yf he come in the thyrd
watche, and shall fynde them soo, happy
are thoose servauntes.

39 This shall ye vnderstonde, that yff
the good man of the housse had knowen,
what houre the thefe wolde have com-
men, he wolde suerly have watched,
and not have suffered his housse to have
bene broken vppe.

40 Be ye prepared therfore, for the
Sonne of man will come att an houre,
when ye thynke not.

41 Then Peter sayd vnto him. Master,
tell est thou this similitude vnto vs, or
to all men ?

42 And the Lorde said. Who is a faith-
full stewarde, and a discrete, whom his
lorde shall make ruler over his hous-
holde, to geve them their dueti of meate
at due season ?
43 Happy is that servaunt, whom his
master, when he cometh, shall finde soo
doinge.

44 Of a trueth I saye vnto you, that
he will make him rueler over all that
he hathe.

45 But and if the evyll servaunt shall
saye in his hert. My master wyll differrc
his commynge ; and shall begyn to
smyte the servauntes, and maydcns, and
to cate, and drynkc, and to be dronken,
46 The lorde off that servaunt wyll
come, in a daye when ho thynkoth nott,
and att an houre when he is not ware ;
and wyll dcvyde hym, and will gcvo
him his rowardo with tho onboloviM-s.

47 'i'h(« Horvauntthat knowc; his niastors
wyll, and prepared nott him silfe, nether

362

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

;

;

lilafordes willau, he bi)> wltnod man-
egiiin \vitum.

dyde,

48 Done })eow de his willan nyste, and
he bi|> witnod
cteah
feawum witum. ^'Icum de Diyccl ge-
seald is, him man mycel to sec|) ; and
set dam do hig micel befoestou, hig
mycel bidda|>.

49 Fyr ic sende on eorjian, and hwa?t
wylle ic, biiton daet hit baerne ?

50 Ic hcebbe on fulluhte beon gcfiillod,
and hu beo ic ge[)read, od hyt sy ge-
fylled 1

51 Wene ge, fordam de ic com sybbe
Ne, secge ic eow,

on cor|?an sendan ?
ac todal.

52 Heonon-for}) beoj)

huse todselede ;
twegen on }>ry beo)i todaclede

fife on anum
]>ry on twegen, and

53 Feeder on sunn, and sunu on his
faeder ; moder on dohter, and dohter on
hyre moder ; swegr on h}Te snore, and
snoru on hyre swegre.

54 And he cwnc]) to dam folcc, Donne
ge geseoj) da lyfte cumende on west-
daele, sona ge cwedaj), Storm cym})
and hit swa by)).

55 And donne ge geseoj) sudan bh'iwan,
ge secgaj), Daet ... is toweard ; and
iiit by)).

56 La liceteras, cunne ge lifandian
heofones ansyne and eor))an, humcta na
afandige ge das tide ?

57 Hwn ne deme ge of eow-sylfum
diet riht is ?

58 Donne du gaest on wcge mid dinuni
widcr-winnan to h>>'ylcum ealdre, do
dn?t dii beo fram him ulysed ;
de-hi s
lie de sylle dam deman, and se denia
dam bydele, and se by del de sende on
cwertern.

59 Ic secge de, Ne gaest du danone,

XII. 48-59.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

363

redy, and dide not vp his wille, schal be
betun with many woundis.

48 Sothli he that knew not, and dide
worthi thingis of woundis, schal be beten
Forsoth to ech man to
with fewe.
whom moche is 3ouun, moche schal be
axid of hym ; and thei schulen axe
more of him, to whom thei bitoken
moche.

49 I cam to sende fier in to erthe, and
what wole I, no but that it be kyndelid %

50 Sothli I haue to be baptisid with
baptym, and hou am I constreyned, til
it be perfytli don 1

51 Gessen ^e, for I cam to ^yue pees
in to erthe? Nay, I seye to 30U, but
departynge.

52 Forsoth fro this tyme ther schulen
be fyue departid in oon hous j
thre
schulen be departid a3ens tweyne, and
tweyne schulen be departid a3ens thre ;
53 The fadir a3ens the sone, and the
sone a3ens his fadir ; the modir a3ens
the dou3tir, and the dou3tir a3ens the
modir ; the hosebondis modir a3ens the
sones wyf, and the sones wyf a3ens hir
hosebondis modir.

54 Forsoth he seid and to the cum-
panyes, Whanne 3e schulen se a cloude
rysinge fro the sunne goynge doun,
anon 30 seyn, Reyn cometh ; and so it
is don.

55 And whanne 30 seen the south blow-
ynge, 30 seyen, For heete schal be ; and
so it is don.

56 Ypocritis, 3e han knowe to proue
the face of heuene and of erthe, but hou
prouen 36 not this tyme ?

57 Forsothe whi and of 30U silf dcme

36 not this thing that is iust ?

58 Forsothe whanne thou goist with
thin aduersaric to the prince in the wcyc,
3yuc thou bisyncssc to be delyuercd fro
lest pcraucnturc he drawe thee
him ;
to the domcsman, and tlie domcsnian
bitake thee to the wrongful axcre, and
the wrongful axcre scndc thee in to
prisoun.

did accordynge to his will, shalbe beten
with many strypes.

48 Butt he that knewe nott, and hath
committed thynges worthy of strypes,
shalbe beaten with feawe strypes.
For
vnto whom moche ys gQYen, off hym
shalbe moche requyred ; and to whom
men moche commytt, the moare of hym
will they axe.

49 I cam to sende fyre on erth, and
what ys my desire, but that yt were all
redy kyndled ?

50 Nott with stondinge I muste be
baptised with a baptim, and how am
I payned, till it be ended 1

51 Suppose ye, that I am come to
I tell you, naye,

sende peace on erth 1
but rather debate.

52 For hence forthe there shalbe five
thre agaynst

in won housse devided ;
two, and two agaynst thre ;

53 The father shalbe devided agaynst
the Sonne, and the sonne agaynst the
father ; the mother agaynst the doughter,
and the doughter agaynst the mother ;
the motherelawe agaynst the doughtere-
lawe, and the doughterelawe against the
motherelawe.

54 Then sayde he to the people. When
ye se a cloude ryse out off the west,
strayght waye ye saye; We shall have a
shewer ; and soo it is.

55 And when ye se the south wynde
blow, ye saye. We shall have licet ; and
it commeth to passe.

56 Ypocrytes, ye can skyll of the fassion
of the erth and of the skye, but what is
the cause that ye cannot skyll of this
tyme?

57 Ye and why iudge ye nott off yourc
selves that which is rightcwcs?

58 Whill thou gocst witli thyne adver-
sary to the rueler as thou arte in the
waye, gevc diligence that thou mayst bo
delivered from liyni ;
least lie bryngo
the to the iudge, and the iudge deliver
the to the ioylar, and the ioylar cast tho
in to prcson.

59 I scic to thee, Thou schalt not go

59 I

tell

the, Thou dcpartcst

not

2
1

304

GOTHIC, 3^0.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

8pr du agylde done ytcmcstan fcor|>-
ling.

Chap. XIII.

i Dar waeron sumo on
daere tide, of Galileum him cydcnde,
dsera blod Pilatus mcnicde mid hcora
off'rungum.

2 Da cwoe|> he him andswarigcnde,
Wenc ge, waeron da Galilciscan synfulle
to-foran eallum Galileiscum, fordam do
hig swylc J^olcdon 1

3 Ne, sccge ic, na; ac eallc gc gclice

forweorda|>, biiton ge daed-bote don.

4 Swa da ehtatyne, ofer da feoll se
stypel on Syloa, and hig ofsloh, wene
ge, dajt hig waeron scyklige ofer calle
menu de on Hienisalem ^^^ncdon ?

5 Ne, secge ic ; ac swa ge forwcorda}),

buton ge daed-bote dou.^

6 Da saede he him dis bigspcl.

Sum
man ha^fde an fic-treow geplautod on
his wiu-gearde, da com he and sohte
his waestmas on him, da ne fiinde he
nanue.
7 Da cwfcj) he to dam h}Tdc, Nu synd
J)reo gear, syddan ic com wa^stm secende
on dissum fic-treowc, and ic ne funde ;
forceorf hinc, hwi ofj^ricj? he diet hmd ?

8 Da cwie}i he, Hlaford, laet hine gyt
dis gear, od ic hinc bedelfe, and ic hine
bewcorpc mid mcoxe ;

9 And witodlicc he wjrstmas bring|>,
gif hit ellcs hwiut by|> ccorf hine syd-
dan.

10 Da wa^s lie rcste-dagum on hcora

gesamnunge laerende.

1

Da w.TS dar sum wif sco haefde
untrunmcsse gast ehtatyne gear, and
heo wa^s abogen, nc heo ealhinga ne
militc up-bcscon.

1

forlaeten

Da se Haelend hig

gcscah, he
clypodc hig to him, and saede h}Te,
\\ii\ du cart
of dinre un-
tnimnessc.

1

1

XIII. I-I2.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

305

thennis, til thou 3elde also the last fer-
thing.

thence, tyll thou have made goode the
vtmose farthynge.

Chap. XIII.

i Forsothe sum men
nei^eden in that tyme, tellinge to him
of Galilees, whos blood Pilat myngede
with the sacrificis of hem.

2 And he answeringe seide to hem,
Wenen ^e, that thes men of Galilee
weren synneris byfore alle Galileis, for
thei suflfriden suche thingis 1

3 Nay, I seye to 50U ; but alle ^e
schulen perische in lyk manere, no but
5e schulen haue penaunce.

4 And as tho ten and ei5te, on which
the tour of Siloa felde doun, and SI0U5
hem, gessen ^e, for and thei weren det-
tours more than alle men dwellinge in
Jerusalem ?

5 Nay, I sei to 50U ; but also 5e alle
schulen perische, if 3e schulen not do
penaunce.

6 Forsothe he seide this lyknesse. Sum
man hadde a fyge tree plauntid in his
vyner, and he cam sekynge fruyt in it,
and fond not.

Chap. XIII.

i There were present
at the same season, that shewed hym of
the Galileans, whose bloude Pilate meng-
led with their awne sacrifice.

2 And Jesus answered and sayde vnto
them. Suppose ye, that these Galileans
were greater
synners then all other
Galileans, be cause they suffred suche
punysshment 1

3 I tell you, naye ; but except ye re-
pent, ye shall all in lyke wyse perysshe.

4 Or thynke ye, that those xviij. apon
whom the toure in Siloe fell, and slewe
them, were synners above all men that
dwell in Jherusalem ?

5 I tell you, naye ; butt excepte ye

repent, ye all shall lyke wyse perisshe.

6 He put forthe this similitude. A
certayne man had a fygge tree in his
vyneyarde, and he cam and sought frute
theron, and founde none.

7 Sothli he seide to the tilier of the
vyner. Loo !
thre ^eeris ben, sithen I
come sekinge fruyt in this fyge tree,
and I fond not ;
therfore kitt it doun,
wherto occupieth it, 5he, the erthe 1

8 And he answeringe seide to him.
Lord, suffre also this ^eer, til the while
I delue aboute it, and sende toordis ;

9 And if it schal make fruyt, ellis in
tyme to comynge thou schalt kittc it
doun.

10 Forsothe ho was techinge in the

7 Then sayde he to the dresser of his
vyneyarde, Beholde !
this thre yeare,
have I come and sought frute in this
fygge tree, and fynde none ;
cut it
doune, why combreth hit the grounde ?
8 And he answered and sayde vnto
him, Lorde, lett it alone this yeare also,
till I digge rounde aboute it, and donge
it;

9 To se whether it will beare frute, yt

not then after that cut hym doune.

10 He taught in won of their sina-

synagoge of hcfn in sabotis.

1

And loo ! a womman that hadde a
spirit of sykcncssc ten an<l ei3te 3CcriH,
and was bowid doun, nether in ony ma-
nere my^te lookc vpward.

12 Whom whannc Jhcsu linddc soyn,
he clepidc to hyin, and Hcidc to hir,
"Wonmian, thou ert left of thi Hykencsse.

gogges on the saboth dayes.

1

And beholde ! there was a woman
wliicli had a sprete off infirniitic .xviij.
yeares, and was ])()wed to gcthcr, and
couldo nott well lifte vp her silfc.

12 When Jesus sawe her, lie called licr
to liyTM, and sayde to lier, Woman, tliou
arte delivered from thy disease.

3GG

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

4

13 AdJ liis band h)TC on sette,

cla
wa's heo sona up-ara^rcd, and beo God
wiildrode.

1

Da gebealb se dugude-caldor bine,
forttam t!e se Hsclend on reste-da?ge
baclde, and ssede dam menegura, Syx
dagas synd, on dam gebyra}> da't man
wyrce ; cumaj) on dam, and beoj? ge-
beelede, and na on reste-daege.

15 Da andswarode se Hselend and
cw£e}>, La lieeteras, ne untlgj^ eower aelc
on reste-daege bis oxan, odde assan,
fram da^re binne, and lact to wietcre 1

16 Das Abrabamcs dolitor, de Satanas
geband, nu !
ne ge-
byrede byre beon unbiludeu of dissum
bende on reste-daege 1

ebtatyne

gear,

17 Da be dis saede, da sceamod ealle
bis wider-Avinnan,
folc ge-
blissode on eallura, dam de waildorfuUice
fram bim gewurdon.

And call

18 S6|>Iice be cwncj>, Hwam is Codes
rice geb'c] and bwam >vene ic da?t hit
beo gelic ?

19 Hit ys gelic seucpes come, da^t se
man onfeng, and seow on his wyrt-tun ;
and bit weox, and wear}) mycel treow,
and heofenes
bogum.

fugehis

20 And eft he cwa^j^, Hwam weue ic

reston

on

liis

da^t Codes rice si geb'c 1

21 Hit is gelic dam beorman, de dajt
wif onfeng, and bt'byddc on dam luelewe
\neo gcmetu, od bit wear}) call libafen.

22 Da ferde he j'urh

ccastra and

castelu, to Hierusalcm and dar laerde.

23 Da cwiej) sum man to him, Dribten,
gebaclede ? Da

feawa synd, de s^Tid
c\\iv\> be to him,

24 E'fstaj) daet ge gangon juirb da^t
nearwe geat ; fordam ic secge eow,
manega scca|> dat big in-giin, and hi
ne nuigon.

25 Donne se liiredes caldor in-gap|),
and his dnni beclyst, ge standa|i dar
lite, and da duru cnuciaj), and cwedaj>,
Donne cwy)) he to
Dribten, atyn us.

6
8
9

!

5
9

XIII. 13-25.] WYCLIFFE^isSp.

13 And lie puttide to hir the hoondis,
and a non she was reysid, and glorifiede
God.

14 Sothli the prince of synagoge an-
sweringe, hauynge dedeyn for Jhesu
hadde heelid in the saboth, seide to the
cumpany, Sixe dayes ben, in whiche it
therfore come in
bihoueth to wirche ;
thes, and be ^e heelid, and not in the
dayes of saboth.

15 Forsothe the Lord answeringe to
him seide, Ypocrite, wher ech of 50U
vntyeth not in the saboth his oxe, ethir
asse, fro the stable, and ledith for to
watre ?

1

Bihoffce it not this dou5tre of Abra-
ham, whom Sathanas hath bounden, loo
ten and ei3te ^eeris, to be vnbounden of
this bond in the day of saboth '?

17 And whanne he seide thes thingis,
his aduersaries weren aschamyd.
alle
And al the peple ioyede in al thingis,
that weren don gloriously of him.

1

Therfore he seide, To what thing is
the rewme of God lyk 1 and to what
thing schal I gesse it to be lyk 1

1

It is lyk to a corn of seneuey, which
takun, a man sente in to his ^erd ; and
it wax, and was maad in to a greet tree,
and fowelis of the eyr restiden in the
braunchis therof

20 And eftsone he sayd, To what thing
the kyngdom of God

schal I gesse
lyk?

21 It is lyk to sourdow^, which takun,
a womman hidith in thre mesuris of
mcle, til al were sourdowid.

22 And he wente by citees and castels,
tcchinge and makinge iurney in to Jeru-
Bulem.

23 Sothli sum man seide to him, Lord,
if there ben fewc, that ben sauyd 1 Sothli
lie Hcidc to hem,

24 Stryue 3c for to entre by the streit
jate ; for I seye to 30U, many men seken
for to entre, and thei schulcu not mowc.

25 Forsothe whanne the hoscbonde
man hath cntrid, and closid the dore,
5c Hchulcn Ijigynnc to stondc witli outc
forth, and knocke the dore, seyinjjc.

TYNDALE, 1526.

3G7
13 And he layde his hondes on her,
and immediatly she was made strayght,
and glorified God.

14 The ruler off the sinagoge answered,
with indignacion be cause that Jesus
had healed on the saboth daye, and
sayde vnto the people. There are sixe
dayes in the weke, in which men ought
to worke ; in them come, and be healed,
and nott on the saboth daye.

1

Then answered hym the Lorde and
sayd, Ypocryte, doth not cache one of
you on the saboth daye loose his oxe,
or his asse, from the stall, and leade
hym to the water]

16 And shulde not this doughter of
Abraham be loosed from this bonde on
the saboth daye, whom Sathan hath
bounde, loo ! xviij. yeares 1

17 And when he thus sayde, all his
adversaris were ashamed. And all the
people reioysed on all the excellent
dedes, that were done by hym.

18 Then sayde he, What is the kyng-
dom of God lyke 1 or where to shall I
compare it 1

1

It is lyke a grayne of mustard seede,
which a man toke, and sowed in his
garden ; and it grewe, and wexed a
greate tree, and the foules off the ayer
bilt in the braunches of it.

20 And agayne he sayde. Where vnto

shall I lyken the kyngdom of God ?

21 It is lyke leven, which a woman
toke, and hidde in thre busshels of floure,
till all was thorow levended.

22 And he went thorowe cities and
tounes, teachynge and toke his iorncy
towardes Jerusalem.

23 Then sayde won vnto hym, Lorde,
are there feawc, that shalbe saved 1 And
he sayde vnto them,

24 Stryve with youreselvcs to enter in
at the strayte gate ; for many, I saye
vnto you, will seke to enter in, and shall
nott ]>c able.

25 When tlie good man of the housse is
risen vp, and liatlic sliett fast tlie dorr,
and ye bcgyn to stondc with out, and
to knocke at the dore, sayngc, Lorde,

368

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

eow, Ne can ic eow, nut ic Invanon ge
synd.

26 Donne ongfynne pe cwettan, We
seton and druncon beforan de, and on
drum stratum ctu lajrdest.

27 Donne sq^]> lie eow, Ne caim ic
gewitaj> fram nie,

hwanon ge synd ;
ealle unriht-wyrhtan.

28 Dar bi}> wop and tojja grystlung,
donne ge gesco)> Abraliam, and Isaac,
and lacob, and ealle witegan on Godea
rice ; and ge beo}) lit-adrifene.

29 And liig cumaj) fram east-daele and
west-daele, and norjj-ditle .... and
sittajj on Godes rice.

30 And efne ! synd ytcmeste, da dc
beo}? fyrmeste ; and synd fyrmeste, da
de beoj) ytcmeste.

31 On dam dajge liira gcneala'bton
sume Farisei, and him sanlon, Far. and
ga heonon, fordam de Hcrodes de wylc
ofslean.

32 And da cw.TJ? he to him, Ga)>, and
sccgaj? dam foxe, Deofol-seocnessa ic ut-
adrife, and ic hsela gefrcmme, to-da?g
and to-morgen, and jjriddan diege ic
beo fornnmen.
33 Deah hwa^dcre me geb}Tej) to-da?g,
and to-morgen, and dy lefteran di^ge,
gan ; fordam de ne gcbyre}? da3t se
witejra forweorde butan Hicrusalem.

34 Eala Hierusalem, Hicrusalem, dii
de da witegan ofslylist, and ha^nst da
dc to de asende synd, hii oft ic wolde
dine beam gegaderian, swii se fugel dej>
his nest under his fiderum, and dii
noldest.

35 Nil !

bi)> eower bus eow forlaeten.
ic cow secge, diet ge me ne
S^l^lice
gesco}), sprdam de cume se, donne ge
cwoda|), Gebletsod sy, se de com ou
Drihtnes naman.

Chap. XIV.

^i Da wfcs geworden,
da he code on sumcs Farisca caldros
hus, on reste-da3ge, dajt he hlaf sete, and
hig begymdou bine.

;

XIIL 26.-XIV. I.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

369

Lord, opyne to vs. And he answeringe
schal seye to 30U, I knowe not 30U, of
whennis ^e ben.

26 Thanne ^e scliulen bigynne to seye,
We ban ete and drunke bifore tbee, and
in oure streetis thou hast tau3t.

27 And he schal seye to 30U, I knowe
not 30U, of whennis 3e ben ; go 3e awey
fro me, alle worcheris of wickidnesse.

28 Ther schal be wepinge and betinge
to gidere of teeth, whanne 30 schuleii se
Abraham, and Ysaac, and Jacob, and
alle prophetis in the kyngdom of God
sothli 30U to be put out.

29 And thei schulen come fro the eest
and west, and fro the north and south,
and sitte at the mete in the rewme of
God.

30 And loo !

thei that weren firste,
ben the laste ; and thei that weren the
last, ben the firste.

31 In that day summe of Pharisees
camen ny3, seyinge to him, Go out, and
go hennis, for Eroude wole slee thee.

32 And he seith to hem, Go 3e, and
seye 36 to that fox, Loo ! I caste out
fendis, and I make perfitly heelthis, to
day and to morvve, and the thridde day
I am end id.
33 Netheles it bihoueth me to day,
and to morvve, and the day suynge, to
walke ; for it fallith not a prophete to
perische out of Jerusalem.

34 Jenisalem, Jerusalem, that sleest
prophetis, and stoonest hem that ben
sent to thee, hou ofte wolde I gedere to
gidere thi sones, as a brid his nest vnder
peunes, and thou noldist.

35 Loo ! 3onre hous schal be left to
30U desert.
Sothli I seie to 30U, for 30
schulen not se me, til it come, whanne
is he, that

schulen seye, Blcssid

30
Cometh in the name of the Lord.

lorde, open vnto vs. And he shall an-
swer and saye vnto you, I knowe nott
whence ye are.

26 Then shall ye begyn to saye. We
have eaten and dronken in thy presence,
and thou hast naught in oure stretes.

27 And he shall saye, I tell you I wott
nott whence ye are ; departe from me,
all ye workers off iniquytie.

28 There shalbe wepynge and gnassh-
ynge of teth, when ye shall se Abraham,
and Ysaac, and Jacob, and all the pro-
phetes in the kyngdom of God ; and
youre selves thrust oute a dores.

29 And they shall come from the eest
and from the weest, and from the northe
and from the southe, and shall reest in
the kingdom of God.

30 And beholde ! there are last, which
shalbe fyrst ; and there are fyrst, which
shalbe last.

31 The same daye there cam certaine
of the Pharises, and sayd vnto him,
Gett the out of the waye, and departe
hence, for Herode will kyll the.

32 And he sayd vnto them. Goo ye,
and tell that foxe, Beholde ! I cast oute
devils, and heale the people, to daye and
to morowe, and the thyrd daye I make
an ende.

33 Neverthelesse I must walke, to daye,
and to morowe, and the daye folowinge ;
for it cannott be that a prophet perisshe
eny other where save att Jerusalem.

34

Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which kill-
est prophetes, and stonest them that are
sent to tlie, howe often wolde I have
gadered thy chiklren to gcdder, as the
hen her nest vnder her wyngcs, and
thou woldest nott.

35 Beholde ! youre habitacion shalbe
For I tell you,
left vnto you desolate.
ye shall not se me, vntill the time come,
that ye shall saye, Blessed ys he, that
conmieth in the name off the Lorde.

Chap. XIV.

i And it was don,
whanne he had entrid in to the hous of
sum prince of T'hari.s* cs, in the saboth,
to etc Ijrccd, and thei aspicdcn him.

Chap. XIV. 1 And it chaunscd, that
lie went into the housse of won off the
chcfc I'hariscH to oate breed, on a sabotli
daye, and they watched hym.

K 1)

4
2

4

1

3/0

GOTHIC, 360.

.

, na aftumistan

iiabau staj).

10 Ak ])nn liaitaizau, at^^aggands, an-
akiiinbei ana |)amma aftumistiii stada, ei
bil^e qimai, saei haihait |)iik, qi))ai du
]>us, Friyond, usgagg liaubis.
j^anuli
ist ])iis hauliijja faura j)aiiu mij^anakumb-
yaudain ])us.

T I Unte Avbazub saci baubcij) sik silba,
biiaiweij) sik

gabnaiwyada ; yab saei
sill)an, usbauliyada.

1

Q:iJ)u})-|nui yab )'ainnia liaitandin
sik, pan waurkyais undaurniniat, ai|)})au
nabtaniat, ni baitais friyonds {leinans,
nib broj^runs jieinans, nib nij^yans j'cin-
ana, nili garaznans gabcigans ; *il)ai aufto
yali cis aftra baitaina j)uk, yab wairjiij)
j)us usguldan.

13 Ak )mn waurkyais daubt, bait iin-

ledans, ganiaidans, baltans, blindaus,

1

Yab au(bigs wair|>is ; unte cis ni
ba])an(l usgibbm )uis, usgiblada auk j'lis
in ustassai |)izc uswaurbtanc.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Like

2 Da wses dar sum waetcr-seoc man

beforan bim.

3 Da cwiej) se Haclend to clam se-gleaw-
um and Fariseum, Is bit alyfed daet man
on reste-dagum bcelc 1

4 Da suwodon big. Da nam he bine

and gebselde, and forlet byne.

5 Dii cwa3|) he to him, andswariende,
Hwylces eowres assa odtle oxa ])efeal[>
on senne pytt, and ne tib]? be byne britd-
lice up on reste-da?ge 1

6 Da ne mibtou big agen dis him ge-

andwyrdan.

7 Da ssede be sum bigspel be dam in-
gelajjedon, gymende bu big da fyrmestau
setl gccuron, and dus cwa?)?,

8 Donne dii byst to g}'ftum gelaj^od,
ne site du on dam fyrmestau setle ; de-
loes wenunga sum weorjjfub'a sig
in-
gela))od fram bim,

9 And donne cume se de de in-ge-
bi])ode, and secge de, Rym dysum men
setl, and dii donne mid sceame nyme
daet ytemeste setb

10 Ac donne du geclypod byst, gii,
and site on dam ytcmestan setle, dset se
de de in-gcla|5ode, donne he cym|>, cwede
to de, La frcond, site ufer.
Donne by}>
de wcor]imynt beforan mid-sitteudum.

1

Fordam aclc de bine up-abcf|i, bi})
genyderod ; and se de bine nydera)>, se
bif) uj>-ab:ifcn.

12 D.i cwie}» be to dam, de bine in-ge-
laj'ode, Donne du dcst wiste,odde feorme,
ne clypa du dine frynd, ne dine ge-
brodru, ne dine ciidan, ne dine welegan
nobbeburas ; de-bvs hi de ugCn laj)ion,
and dii biebbe cdlean.

13 Ac donne dii gebeorscj-pe do, clypa
j'carfan, and wanbale, and bealte, and
bbude,

1

Donne bist du eadig ; fordam de
bi nabba}>, hwanon big bit de forgyldon,
s6)>lice hit by|) dc forgoldcn on ribtwisra
jeriste.

1

1

XIV. 2-14.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

2 And loo ! sum man syk in ydropesie

was bifore him.
. 3 And Jhesu answeringe seide to the
wyse men of lawe, and to Pharysees,
seiyinge, Where it is leeful for to heele
in the sabotis 1

4 And thei heelden pees.

Forsothe

Jhesu heelide him takun to, and lefte.

5 And he answeringe to hem, seyde,
Whos asse ether oxe of 50ure schal falle
in to a pitt, and not a non he schal
drawe out him on the day of sabot 1

6 And thei my3ten not answere to him

to thes thingis.

7 Forsothe he seyde also a parable to
men bodun to a feeste, biholdinge how
thei chesiden the firste seetis, seyinge
to hem,

8 Whanne thou schalt be bedun to wed-
dingis, sitte thou not at the mete in the
firste place ; lest perauenture a worschip-
fullere than thou be bedun of him,

9 And he comynge that clepide thee
and him, seye to thee, 3y^^ place to
this, and thanne thou schalt bigynne
with schame to holde the laste place.

10 But whanne thou schalt be bedun
to feeste, go, and sitte doun in the laste
place, that whanne he schal come, that
bad thee to feeste, he seye to thee,
Frend, sti'5e hi3ere. Thanne gloric schal
l)e to thee bifore men syttinge to gidere
at the mete.

1

For ech that enhaunsith him silf,
schal be maad low^ ; and he that mekith
him silf, schal be hi^cd.

1 2 Forsoth he seide also to him, that
hadde bedun liim to the feeste, Whanne
thou makist a mete, ether souper, nyle
thou clepc thi frcndis, nether thi bri-
thcren, nethir cosyns, ncthir nei3cbori.s,
nether riche men ; lest perauenture and
thei bidde thee a3en to feeste, and 3eld-
inge a3en be maad to thee.

13 But whanne thou makist a feeste,
clepe pore men, fcblc men, crokid, and
blyndc,

14 And thou schalt be blessid ;

for
thei han not, whcr of to 3elde to th(!C,
forsotli it Hchal be 3ol(lun to thee in the
risyng a3en of iustc men.

TYNDALE, 1526.

371
2 And beholde ! there was a man be-

fore hym which had the dropsy.

3 And Jesus answered and spake vnto
the lawears, and Pharises, sayinge. Is hit
laufull to heale on the saboth daye 1

4 And they helde their peace. He
toke the man and healed him, and lett
hym goo.

5 And answered them sayinge, Whiche
of you shall have an asse or an oxe fallen
into a pitt, and will nott straight waye
pull him out on the saboth daye 1

6 And they coulde not answer hym

agayne to that.

7 He putt forthe a similitude to the
gestes, when he marked howe they
preased to the hyest roumes, and sayd
vnto them,

8 When thou arte bidden to a wedd-
ynge of eny man, sitt nott doune in the
hyest roume ;
lest a more honorable
man then thou be bidden of hym,

9 -^nd he that badde bothe hym and
the come, and saye to the, Geve this
man roume, and thou then begyn with
shame to take the lowest roume.

10 But rather when thou arte bidden,
goo, and sit in the lowest roume, that
when he that bade the commeth, he
maye saye vnto the, Frende, sitt vp
Then shalt thou have preyase in
hyer.
the presence of them that sitt at meate
with the.

1

For whosoever exalteth hym silfe,
shalbe brought lowe ; and he that huni-
bleth him silfe, shalbe exalted.

12 Then sayde he also to him, that
bade liim to diner. When thou makest
a diner, or a supper, call not thy frendes,
nor thy brethren, nether thy kinsmen,
nor yet riche neghbours ; lest they bidde
the agayne, and make the rec^mpence.

T3 Butt when thou makest a feast, call
the povre, the maymed, the lame, and
the bliiuie,

14 And thou shalt be happy ; for tliey
cannot rccompence the, butt thou shalt
be rccoinpt'iiHed at the resurreccion of
the iustc men.

n 1) 2

1

372

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

15 Caliausyands )ian sums |)izei an-
akunibyaudaiie |)ata, (jaj) dii imnia, Aiul-
ags, saei matyij) hlaif in |)iudangardyai

15 Da dis gehyrde sum of ctam sittend-
um, d;i c\va?}> he, Eadig is se, de hlaf
yt on Godes rice.^

Gu|)S.

i 6 paridi qaj> iinina Frauya, Manna
sums gawaurhta nalitaniat niikilana, yah
liaihait nianagans.

17 Yah insandida skalk scinana wheihii
nalitamatis, (p|)au Jniim liaitanam, gagg-
i|), uute yu manwu ist alhita.

18 Yah dugunnun suns faurqijjan allai.
Sa frumista qa}>, Land bauhta, yah \>&ri
galci})an, yah saiwhan j^ata ; bidya j>uk,
habai mik faunjij^anana.

19 Yah an|)ar qa|>, Yuka auhsne us-
bauhta fimf, yah gagga kausyan jians ;
bidya ])uk, habai mik faur(p])anaua.

16 Da sacde lie him. Sum man worhte

mycele feorme, and manega gela])ode.

17 Da scndc he his J^eowan to drrre
feorme timan, dait he sacde dam gela|)-
cdum, diet hig comon, fordam de ealle
jjing gearwe Wccron.

18 Da onrjunnon hijj ealle hi<j beladian.
Se forma him sacde, Ic bohte aenne tun,
ic hsebbe neode da?t ic fare, and bine
dii me be-
geseo ;
ladige.

ic bidde de, da_'t

19 Da cwaej) se oder, Ic bohte an ge-
tyme oxena, nu wille ic faran and fand-
ian hyra ; nu bidde ic de, belada me.

20 Yah sums qaj), Qcn liugaida ; yali

20 Da cwjej^ sum, Ic Isedde wif ham ;

t.lu})e ni mag qiman.

2

Yah qimands sa skalks, gataih frau-
panuh |)wairli^ sa
yln scinamma |'ata.
gar(hiwal<huids, qaj) du skalka seinamma,
Usgagg sprauto in gatwons yah staigos
baurgs, yah unlc(h\ns, yah gamaidans,
yah blindaus, yah haltans attiuh hidre.

fordam ic ne ma^fj cuman.

21 Da cyrde se })eowa, and cydde his
Du ewae|> se hlaford mid
hlaforde dcTt.
yrre to dam peowan, Ga lirade on da
striata and on wic disse ceastre, and
[jcarfan, and wanhale, and blinde, and
healte laed hider in.

22 Yah qa}> sa skalks, Frauya, warj>,

swe anabaust, yah nauh stads ist.

23 Yah qaj) sa frauya du ))amma skalka,
Usgagg and wigans yah iajios, yali nau|)t'i
'innatgaggau, ei usfulnai gards meins.

24 Qi))a allis izwis, |\itei ni ainshun
niannc yainai/c )>izc faura haitanane,
kauseij) ))is nahtamatis mcini.s.

25 Mi[)iddyidun ))an imma hiuhmana
qa)>

managai ; yah gawandyands sik,
du im,

26 Yabai whas gaggij) du mis, yah ni
fiyai|> attan scinana, yah aij'c'in, yah (jcn,
yah barna, yah br()|)runs, yah swistruns,
nauhuj) |)an soina siil)ins saiwala, ni mag
mciiis siponcis wisan.

27 Yah saei ni bairij) galgan scinana,
yali gaggai afar mis, ni mag wisau meins
siponcis.

22 Dii cw.TJ^ sc l^eowa, Hlaford, hit ys
gedon, swa dii bude, and mi gyt her is
ajnitig stow.

23 Dii cwa^j) so hlaford dii gyt to dam
jjcowan, Ga geond d.is wegas and hogas,
and nyd hig diet hig gan in, da^t min
hiis si gcfyllcd.

24 S6|>lice ic cow sccge, da^t nnn da^ra
manna de geclypode synd, ne onbyrigcaj)
minre feorme.^

25 S6})liee mid him ferde mycel man-

ego ; da cwaj) he, to him beweiid,

26 Gyf liwii to me cymj), and ne liataj;
his fanler, and moder, and wif, and
beam, and brcdru, and swustra, and
domic £jvt his sawle, 11c miox he beon
miu Icoriiing-cniht.

27 And se do ne byr|) liys cwylminge,
and cym)> a>ftcr me, ne ma^g he boon
min loorning-cniht.

28 Izwara whas raihtis wilyands kclikn

28 Ilwylc eowcr wyle timbrian aune

5

1

XIV. 15-28.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

1

Whanne sum man of sittinge at the
mete had herd thes things, he seide to
hym, Blessid is he, that scbal ete breed
in the rewme of God.

16 And he seide to him, Sum man
souper, and clepide

greet

maade a
manye.

17 And he sente his seruaunt in the
our of souper, to seye to men bedun to
feeste, that thei schulden come, for now
alle thingis ben redy.

18 And alle bigunnen to gidere to ex-
The firste seide, I haue bou^t a
cuse.
toun, and I haue nede to go out, and to
se it ; I preie thee, haue me excusid.

19 And the tothir seide, I haue bou^t
fyue 5okis of oxen, and I go to proue
hem j I preie thee, haue me excusid.

20 And an othir seide, I haue weddid

a "\vyf ; and therfore I may not come.

21 And the

seruaunt turnyd a^en,
Thanne
toolde thes thingis to the lord.
the hosebonde man \vroth, seide to his
seruaunt, Go out soone
in to grete
stretis and smale streetis of the citee,
and biynge in hidur pore men, and
feble, and blynde, and crokid.

22 And the seruaunt seith, Lord, it is
don, as thou hast comaundid, and ^it
place is.

23 And the lord seith to the seruaunt.
Go thou into weyes and heggis, and
constreyne for to cntre, that myn hous
be fillid.

24 Forsothe I scic to ;ou, for noone
of tho men that ben clepid, sclial taaste
my souper.

25 Sothli many cumpanycs wentcn
with him ; and he turned, seide to hem,

26 If ony comcth to mc, and hatith
not liis fadir, and modir, and wyf, soncs,
and britlieren, and dou3tri8, yt forsoth
and his lyf, ho may not bo my disciple.

27 And he that beritli not liiH cross,
and comcth aftir mc, may not bo my
disciple.

TYNDALE, 3526.

373
15 When won of them that sate at
meate also herde that, he sayde vnto
hym, Happy is he, that eateth breed in
the kyngdome of God.

16 Then sayd he to hym, A certayne
man ordened a greate supper, and bade
many.

17 And sent his servaunt att supper
time, to saye to them that wer bidden,
come, for all thynges are redy.

18 And they all atonce began to make
The fyrst sayd vnto him, I
excuse.
have bought a ferme, and I must nedes
goo, and se it ; I praye the, have me
excused.

19 And another sayd, I have bought
fyve yooke of oxen, and I must goo
to prove them ; I praye the, have me
excused.

20 The thyrde sayd, I have maried a

wyfe ; and therfore I cannot come.

2

And the servaunt went agayne, and
brought his master worde there
of.
Then was the good man of the housse
displeased, and sayd to his servaunt.
Goo out quickly into the stretes and
quarters of the citie, and brynge in
bidder the povre, and the maymed, and
the halt, and the blinde.

22 And the servaunt sayd, Lorde, it is
done, as thou commaundest, and yet
there is roume.

23 And the lorde sayd to the servaunt,
Go out into the hie wayes and hedges,
and compell them to come in, that my
housse maye be filled.

24 For I saye vnto you, that none of
those men which were bidden, shall tast
of my supper.

25 There went a greate company with
him ; and he turned, and saide vnto
them,

26 Yf a man come to me, and hate not
his father, and mother, and wyfe, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, more
over and his awne life, he cannot be
my disciple.

27 And whosoever bcarc

hys
crossc, and come after me, cannot ho
my diHci[)]('.

nott

28 Forsoth who of 30U willingc to

28 Which of you is lie that is dcsposcd

;

;

374

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

timbryan, niu friimist pasitands ralmeij)
nianwij'O, liabuiu du ustiuhau 1

•29 Ibai aufto bi|)e gasatidedi grundu-
waddyii, yah ni malitedi ustiuhau, allai
j)ai gasaiwhaudans, duginuaina bilaiUau

ina,

30 Qi|)andaus, patci sa manna dustod-

ida tinibryan, yah ni mahta ustiuhau.

31 Ai|)j)au whas })iudans gaggauds stigq-
an \vi|>ra an[)arana jiiudan du '•'wigauna,
niu gasitands faur}ns |?aukeij>, siaiu niaht-
eigs mi[) tailiun })Usuudyom ganiotyan
jmmma mi[) twaim tigum J)usuudy0 gagg-
andiu ana sik 1

32 P^jjuu yabai nist mahteigs, nauh-
|)anuh fairra imma wisandin, insandyands
airu, bidyij) gawair])yis.

33 Swah nu wharyizuh izwara, saei
ni afqi[)i}> aHanima aigina seiuamma, ni
mag wisan nieins siponeis,

34 God salt ; i\> yabai salt baud wair|)i[>,

whe gasupoda 1

stypel, hii ne sytt he aercst and tele|> da
andfengas (Xe him behcfe synd, hwajcler
he hiebbe hine to full-fremmenne ]

29 De-lses syddan he da^ne gi-und-weall
leg|), and ne ma'g hine full-fremman, ealle
de hit geseoj), iigynnon hine tselan,

30 And cwedan, Hwset dcs man agan

timbrian, and ne mihte hit ge-endian.

31 Oddo gyf hwylc cyning wyle faran
and feohtan agen oderne cyning, hu ne
sit he ser and j)enc}i, hwa dor he m?ege
mid tyn j^usendum cuman agen done
de'him agen cym)j mid twentigum |'U-
sendum ?

32«And gif he donne wid hine gcfeolit-
. he sent aeryndracan,

,

an ne mseg, .
and bitt sibbe.

33 Witodlice swa is selc of eow, de ne
\vid-sa3c)> eallum j)ingum de he ah, ne
ma3<j he beon min leornincr-cniht.

34 God ys sealt ;

dam de hit gesylt bi}> 1

gif hit awyrj^, on

35 Nih du air)xii, ni du maihstau fogr
Saci habai

'ist, ut uswairpand ininia.
ausoua galiausyandona, gahausyai.

35 Nis hit nyt ne on eorjian, no on
myxcne, ac hyt bi|> ut-aworpcn. Gehyre,
se de earan haebbe to gehyrenue.

Chap. XV.

i Wesumi{)-|iau imnia
newhyandans sik alhii motaryos yali fra-
Avaurhtai liausyan 'imma.

2 Yah birodidedun Fareisaicis yah bok-
aryos, qi|)andans, patei sa fiawaurhtaus
andnimi}), yali ini[)matyi|) im.

3 Qa)) j)an du im ))0 gayukon, qij^ands,

Chap. XV.

"'^i S6j>bce liim genca-
Icchton manfuUe and synfuUe, da?t liig
his word geliyrdon.

2 i)a murcnedon da Farisei and da
boccras, and cwa?don, Dcs onfclij) syn-
fulle, and mid him ytt.

3 Da cwa'j) he dis bigspel to dam,

4 Whas manna izwara aigands taihun-
toliund lambc, yah fraliusatids ainaninia
[)0 niuntcimud yali
})ize, niu bik'i[)i})
niun ana au))idai, yah grtggi|) afar j'amnia
frahisanin, untc bigiti{' })ata ]

5 Yah bigitands, uslagyi|) ana amsans

4 Hwylc man is of eow de luTf|) hund
scea]>a, and gif he forlyst an of dam, hit
ne forla?t he donne nigon and hund
nigontig on dam westene, and ga^|> to
dam do forwcarj?, od he hit fi'nt ?

5 And donne he hit fint, he hit set ou

scinans faginonds

his exla geblissiende

6 Yah (|imands 'in garda galajioj) fri-
yonda yah garaznans, qi|ninds du im,
FaginoJ) mi|) mis, j>ammei bigat lamb
mcin, })ata frahisano.

6 And donne he luim cym|', he to-
somne clypa}> hys frynd and his nchhe-
buras, and cwyji, Blissia}) mid me, fordani
ic fiinde min sceap, de forwear|).

7 Qija i'zwis, jmtei swa faheds wair|jij>

7 Ic sccge cow, da?t swa byjr on hcofone

1

;

XIV. 29.-XV. 7-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

375

bylde a tour, wlier he sittinge countitli
not first the spensis that ben nedful_, if
lie haue to performe ?

29 Lest aftir he hath sett the founde-
ment, and my^te not performe, alle that
seen, bigynne to scorne him,

30 Seyinge, For this man bigan to

bilde, and my^te not ende.

3

Ether what kyng to goynge to
make batel a5ens another kyng, wher
he sittinge bythenkith not first,- if he
may with ten thousynd go a5ens him
that Cometh to him with twenty thou-
synd ?

32 Ellis him ^it doinge a fer, he send-
inge a messanger, preieth tho thingis
that ben of pees.

33 So therfore ech of 50U, that re-
thingis whiche he

nouncith
weeldith, may not be my disciple.

not

alle

34 Salt is good thing ; forsoth if salt
schal vanysche, in what thing schal it
be sauerid?

35 Nether in

erthe, nether in the
dunghil it is profitable, but it schal be
He that hath eeris of heer-
sent out.

inge, heere.

to bilde a toure, and sitteth not doune
before and counteth the cost, whether
he have sufficient to performe it 1

29 Lest after he hathe layde the foun-
dacion, and is nott able to performe it,
all that beholde it, begyn to moocke
hym,

30 Sayinge, This man began to bilde,

and was not able to make an ende.

31 What kynge goeth to make batayle
agaynst another kynge, and sitteth not
doune fyrst and casteth in his mynde,
wether he be able with ten thousande
to mete him that cometh agaynst hym
with twenty thousand ?

32 Or els whill the other is yett a
greate waye off*, he will sende embasseat-
ours, and desyre peace.

33 Soo lyke wyse none of you, that
forsaketh nott all that he hathe, can be
my disciple.

34 Salt is good ; but if salt be corupte,

what shall be seasoned there with %

35 It is nether good for the londe, nor
yet for the donge hill, men cast it out
at the dores. He that hath eares to
heare, let him heare.

Chap. XV.

i Forsothe pupplicans
and synful men weren nei3inge to him,
that thei schulden heere him.

2 And Farisees and scribis grucchiden,
seyinge, For this man receyueth synful
men, and ctith with hem.

3 And he seith to hem this parable,

seiynge,

4 Wliat man of 30U that hath an hun-
drid scheep, and if he hath lost oon of
hem, wher lie leeuith not nynty and
nyne in desert, and goth to
it that
perischide, til he fynde it 1

5 And whannc he hath foundcn it, he

ioyingc puttith on his shuldris

6 And he coniyngo hooni cl('i)ith to
gidcre his frcndis and nci3eborH, Hcyinge
to hem, Tliankc 3c
I hauc
founden my schccp, which liaddc pcr-
ischid.

me, for

Chap. XV.

i Then resorted vnto
him all the publicans and synners, for
to heare him.

2 And the Pharises and scribes grudsred.
sainge. He receaveth to his company
synners, and eateth with them.

3 Then put he forthe this similitude to

them, sayinge,

4 What man of you havynge an hun-
dred shepe, if he loose one of them,
doth not levc nynty and nyne in the
wilderries, and goo after hym which is
loost, vntill he fyndc hym 1

5 And when he hath founde hym, ho
puttcth hym on his shuldcrs with ioye ;
6 And as sonc as he commcth homo ho
call(;th to gcddcr his lovers and ncgh-
bours, sayinge vnto them, Rcioysc with
me, for I have founde my shepe, which
was loost.

7 Sothly I seye to 30U, so ioye schal

7 I say vnto you, that lykc wyse ioye

1

;

1

;

3/0

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

in liimina in ainis fi-a\vanrlitis Vdrcij^ond-
ins, Jnui in niuntchundis yah niuiic ga-
railitaize, Jjaiei ui })aurbun itlreigos.

blis be anum synfullum de daed-l)6tc
dcj), ma donne ofer nigon and nigontig-
um rihtwisra, de daed-bote ne be|'urfon.

8 Ai])|mu sunia qino draknians liaband-
ei tailiuii, yabai fraliusi|) drakniin ain-
amnia, niu tandei}) lukarn, yah usbaug-
ei|) razn, 3-ah sokeij) glaggwaba, unte
biglti[)?

9 Yah bigitandei, gahaiti)> friyondyos
yah garaznoiis, qi|>inulei, Faginojj mij)
mis, unte bigat diakniein, jjamnici fra-
laus.

8 Odde hwilc wif ha?f)) tyn scyllingas,
gif heo forlyst seune scylbng, hu nc on-
2e\\) heo hyre leoht-fa?t, and awent hvTC
bus, and sec]) geornhce, od heo bine
fint?

9 And donne heo hinefint, heo clypaj)
hyre frynd and ne]iliel)yryna. and cwy|i,
Blyssiajj mid me, fordam ic iiiiidc miiinc
scylling, de ic forleas.

10 Swa qij>a izwis, faheds wair] ij?

i'n
andwairjjya aggele Gujjs in ainis i'dreig-
ondins frawaurhtis.

1

QaJ)u|)-])an, Manne sums aihta twans

10 Ic secge eow, swa h\\) blis beforan
Godes englum be anum synfullum de
dscd-bote dep.^

1

He cwsej), S6}>lice sum man ha.'fdc

sununs

12 Yah qa|j sa yuhiza i'ze du attin,
Atta, gif mis, sei unchinnai mik, dail

aiu'inis.

Yah disdailida iin swes seiu.

13 Yah afiu-ni managans dagans, bralita
samana allata sa yuliiza sunus, yah aflaij?
in hmd fairra wisando ;
yah yainar
distaliida ])ata swes seinata libands us-
Btiuriba.

14 Bi|)e

}ian frawas

allamma, war])
huhrus abrs and gawi yainata, yah is
dugann ahi|>arba wairj^au.

15 Yah gaggands, gahaftida sik snm-
amma baurgyanc yainis ganyis.
Yah
insandida ina hai))yos seinaizos, haldan
sweina.

16 Yah gairnida sad itan lianrne \>oq\
matideduu sweina, yah manna imma ni

17 Qimands jniu in sis, (|a)), Whan fihi
asnyc attins mcinis, ufarassau haband
hlaibe ;

ij) ik huhrau fraqistna.

18 Usstandanda, gagga <lii attin mein-
amnia, yali qi|m du imma, Atta, fra-
waurhta mis in liimin, yali in andwaii|'ya
))cinamma ;

19 Yu |)anasei|'s ni im wairj'S ci liait-
|)('ins, gatawei mik swo

sunns

aidau
ninana asnyc Jiciiiai/.o.

20 Yah usstandaiids (jam at attin sein-

twegen suna

12 Da cw£e)) se gingi-a to liis fabler,
Feeder, syle me minne djcl minre aiite,
de me to gcbyre)?.
Da diclde he him
his aehte.

13 Da Rafter feawa dagimi, eallc his
|)ing gegaderode se gingra sunn, and
ferde wrceclice on fcorlen rice ; and for-
si)ilde dar his achta lybbcude on his
g?clsan.

14 Da he big lia^fde ealle amjTrede,
d;i wear)) myccl hunger on dam rice,
and he wear]) wa?dla.

15 Da ferde he, and folgode anum
Da
burli-sittendum men da\s
sende he bine to his tune, d^et he heoldc
his swyn.

rices.

16 Da irewilnode he his waml)e crefvl-
Ian of dam l)oan-coddum de da swyn
a?ton, and liim man ne sealde.

17 Da bc{)ohte he bine, and cwa^J>,
Eabi hii fela liyrlinga on mines foeder
liiisc, hlaf genohne habbaj) ; and ic licr
on luingre forweorde.

18 Ic arise, and ic fare to minum fabler,
and ic sccge him, Eala fanler, ic syngodc
on licofenas, and beforan de ;

19 Nu ic ne com wyrde daet ic beo din
sumi gonomned, do me swa anne of din-
um Inrlingum.

20 And he aras da and com to liis

;

5
1

;

XV. 8-20.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, ir.26.

;

377

be in heuene on o synful man doynge
penaunce, than of nynti and nyne iuste,
that han no uede of penaunce.

8 Ether what womman hauynge ten
dragmes,"*" and if sche hath lost
dragme,
wher sche li^teth not a lanterne, and
turneth vpsodoun the hous, and sekith
diligently, til sche fynde '?

9 And whanne sche hath founden, sche
clepith to gidere frendis and nei5eboris,
seyinge, Thanke 36 me, for I haue
founden the dragme, which I hadde
lost.

10 So I seie to 50U, ioye schal be to
the aungels of God on o synful man
doynge penaunce.

T I Forsothe he seith, Sum man hadde

tweye sones

12 And the 3ongere seide to the fadir,
Fadir, 3yue to me the porcioun of sub-
staunce,'*' that byfallith to me. And the
fadir departide to him the substaunce.

13 And not aftir manye dayes, alle
thingis gederid to gidre, the 3ongere
sone wente in pilgrymage in to a fer
cuntree ; and there he wastide his sub-
staunce in lyuynge leccherously.

14 And aftir that he hadde endid alle
thingis, a strong hungir was maad in
that cuntreCj and he bigan to haue nede.

15 And he wente, and cleuyde to oon
And
of the citeseyns of that cuntree.
he sente him in to his toun, that he
schulde feede hoggis.

16 And lie coueitide to fille his wombe
of the coddis whiche the hoggis eetcn,
and no man 3af to him.

17 Sothli he turned a3cn in to him silf,
Bcyde, llou many hirid men in my fadir
lious, han ploufc of looucs ; forsothe T
perisclic here thur3 hungir.

18 I schal ry.se, and I schal go to my
fadir, and I schal scic to him, Fadir, I
haue synncd a3ons hcucnc, and biforc
thee ;

19 Now I am not worthi to be clo[)id
thi Honc, make me as oon of tlii hyrid
men.

20 And he rysingc cam to his fadir.

shalbe in heven over one synner that
re2:)enteth, moore then over nynety and
nyne iuste persons, whiche nede noo
repentaunce.

8 Other what woman havynge .x.
grotes, if she loose won, doth not light
a candell, and swepe the housse, and
seke diligently, till she finde it 1

9 And when she hath founde it, she
calleth her lovers and her neghbours,
saynge, Reioyce with me, for I have
founde the groate, which I had loost.

10 Lykwyse I saye vnto you, ioye
shalbe in the presence off the angels off
God over one synner that repentheth.

And he sayde, A certayne man had

1

two sonnes

12 And the yonger of them sayde to
his father. Father, geve me my parte
off the goodes, that to me belongeth.
And he devided vnto them his sub-
staunce.

13 And not longe after, the yonger
Sonne gaddered all that he had to gedder,
and toke his iorney into a farre countre ;
and there he wasted his goodes with
royetous livinge.

14 And when he had spent all that he
had, there rose a greate derth thorow
out all that same londe, and he began
to lacke.

1

And he went, and clave to a citesyn
Which sent liym

of that same countre.
to the felde, to kepe his swyne.

16 And he wold fayne have filled his
bely with the coddes that the swyne ate,
and noo man gave hym.

17 Then he rcmembrcd hym silfe, and
sayde, Howe many hyred servauntes at
my fathers, have l)rccd ynough ; and I
dye for hongcr.

18 I will a ryse, and goo to my father,
and will suyc vnto hym. Father, I have
synncd agaynst hcven, and before the

19 Nowe am T not worthy to bo called
thy Honno, make nic as one of thy Ijryrcd
HcrvauntcH.

20 And he arose and cam to his father.

1

378

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

amma. Naiih|iaimli ))an fairra wisaiulan,
Yah
gasawh ina atta is, yah iiifciuoda.
|)i*agyands, draus ana hals is, yah kukida
iinma.

21 Yah qa|j inmia sa sunus, Atta, fra-
waurhta i'u hiniin, yah 'in andwair|>ya
jjeinamma ; yu }'anasei})S ui im wairjjs
ci haitaidau sunus |)eins.

22 Qaj) |>an sa atta du skalkam sein-
aim, Sprauto ''^bringi}) wastya \>o frum-
iston, yah gawasyij) ina, yah gibi}> figg-
in haudu is, yah gaskohi ana
ragul[)
fotuns is ;

23 Yah ^'bringandans stiur |)ana alidan,
ufsnei|)i|?, yah inatyandans, wisam waila.

24 Uiite sa sunus meins dau)7S was, yah
gaqiunoda ; yah fralusans was, yah bi-
gitans warj>.

Yah dugunnun wisan.

25 '\Vasu|)-})an sunus "is sa aljnza ana
akra ; yah qimands, ati'ddya newh razn,
yah gahausida saggwins yah laikins.

And c1a gyt eta he wa?s feor, his
fa'der.
fieder he hyne geseah, and wear}) mid
mild-heortnesse astyrod. And Mgen hine
arn, and hine beclypte, and cyste hine.

2

Da cwie|> his sunu, Fa^der, ic syn-
gode on heofon, and beforan de ; nii ic
ne eom w}Tde diet ic din sunu Ijco ge-
nemned.

22 Da cwce}> se faeder to his J)eowum,
Bringaj) rade daene selestan gegyrelan,
and scrydaj) hyne, and syllaj) him bring
on his hand, and gcscy to his fotum ;

23 And bringa]) an fsett

styric, and
ofslea]', and uton etan, and gewistful-
lian.

24 Fordam des min sunu wies dead,
and he ge-edcucode ; he forwearj?, and
Da ongunnon big ge-
he is gemet.
wistlaecan.

25 S6j)lice hys yldra sunu wjes on
secere ; and he com, and di he dam
huse genealahte, he gehyrde djene sweg
and da't wered.

26 Yah athaitands sumana magi we,

26 Da clypode he anne jjeow, and acs-

frahuh, wha wesi jjata.

ode hine, hwjet doet wsere.

27 paruh is qaj> du imnia, patei brojjar
Jjeins qam, yah afsnai|> atta })eins stiur
))ana alidan, unte hailana ina andnam.

27 Da cwa^j) he, Din brodor com, and
din fa'der ofsloh an fa3tt cealf, fordam de
he hyne halne onfeng.

28 panuh modags war)?, yah ni wihla
1|) atta is usgaggands ut,

inngaggau.
bad ina.

29 J)aruh Vs andhafyands, qa|) du attin,
Sai ! swa filu yere skalkinoda [)us, yali
ni whanhun anabusn JK-ina ufari(Ulya ;
yah mis ni aiw atgnft gaitein, ei mij)
friyondam meiuaim biwesyau.

30 1}) }ian sa sunus j'cins, saci fret j^ein
swes mij) kalkyom, qam, ufsnaist imma
stiur

ana alidan.

I

28 Da gebealh he hine, and nolde in-
Da code his fjeder lit, and ongan

gnn.
hine biddan.

29 Da cwfe|j he his faeder andswar-
igende, Efue ! swa fela geara ic de jjeow-
ode, and ic
naefre din be])od ne for-
gymde ; and ne sealdcst dii me na^fre
an ticcen, da3t ic mid minum freondum
gewistfullodo.

30 Ac syddan des din sunu com, de
hys spede mid myltystrum amyrde, dii
ofslcge him ftett cealf.

31 paruh qa|> du imma, Barnilo, |>u
sintcino mi|) mis wast yah is, yah all
jiata mcin |icin ist.

32 Waihi wisan, yah faginon skuld was;
unte bro|>ar ))cins daujs was, yah ga-
(punoda ; yah fralusans, yah bigitans
war|>.

31 Da cwtrj) he, Sunn, du cart 8311110
mid me, and ealle mine jjing synd dine.

32 De gebyrede gewistfulHan, and ge-
l)lissian ; fordam des din brodor waes
doad, and he ge-edcucode ; he forwcarj?
and lie is gemet.

;

;

XV. 21-32.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

379

Sothli whanne he was ^\t fer, his fadir
sy3 him, and he was stirid by mercy.
Aud he rennynge to, felde on his necke,
and kiste him.

21 And the sone seyde to him, Fadir,
I haue synned a3ens heuene, and bifore
thee ; and now I am not worthi to be
clepid thi sone.

22 Forsoth the fadir seyde to his ser-
uauntis, Soone bringe ^e forth the firste
stoole, and clothe 5e him, and ^yue 50 a
ring in his bond, and schoou in to the
feet

23 And brynge 56 a calf maad fat, and
sle 5e, and ete we, and plenteuously ete
we.

24 For this my sone was deed, and
hath l}^ed a3en ; he perischide, and is
And alle bigunnen to eat
founden.
plenteuously.

25 Forsoth his eldere sone was in the
feeld j and whanne he cam, and nei3ede
to the hous, he herde a symphonye and
a crowde.

26 And he clepide oon of the ser-
uaimtis, and axide, wliat thingis thes
weren.

27 And he seide to him, Thi brodir is
comen, and thi fadir hath slayn a fat
calf, for he receyuede him saf.

28 Forsoth he was wroth, and wolde
Therfore his fadir gon out,

not entre.
bigan to preie him.

29 And he answeringe to liis

fadir,
seide, Lo ! so manye 3eeris I serue to
thee, and I brak neuere thi comaunde-
ment ; thou hast neuere 30uun a kyde
to me, that I schulde ete largely with
my frcndis.

30 But aftir that this thi sone, which
deuouride his substauncc with hooris,
cam, thou hast slayn to him a fat calf.

31 And he seide to liim, Sone, thou
ert euerc with me, and alle myne thingis
ben thync.

32 Forsotlie it bilioftc to etc plenteu-
ously, and for to ioyc ; for this thi bro-
ther was deed, and lyucdc a3cyn ; he
peryschidc, and he is founden.

When he was yett a greate waye of, his
father sawe hym, and had compassion
on hym. And ran vnto him, and fell
on his necke, and kyssed hym.

21 And the sonne sayd vnto hym,
Father, I have synned agaynst heven,
and in thy sight ; nether am I worthy
hence forthe to be called thy sonne.

22 Then sayde the father to his ser-
vauntes, Bringe forth that best garment,
and put it on hym, and put a rynge on
his honde, and shewes on his fete

23 And brynge bidder that

fatted
caulfe, and kyll hym, and lett vs eate,
and be mery.

24 For this my sonne was deed, and
is alive agaynej he was loste, and ys
nowe found e. And they began to make
goode cheare.

25 The elder brother was in the felde ;
and when he cam, and drewe nye to the
housse, he herde minstrelcy and dauns-
ynge.

26 And called one of his servauntes,

and axed, what thoose thynges meante.

27 He said vnto him. Thy brother is
come, and thy father hath killed the
fatted caulfe, be cause he hath receaved
him safe and sounde.

28 And he was angry, and wolde not
Then cam his father out, and

goo in.
entreated him.

29 He answered, and sayde to hys
father, Loo ! these many yeares have I
done the service, nether brake at cny
time thy commaundmcnt; and yet gavest
thou me never soo moche as a kyd, to
make mery with my lovers.

30 But as sone as this thy sonne wns
come, which hath devoured thy goodcs
wyth harloottcs, thou haste for his plea-
sure killed the fatted caulfe.

31 And he sayd vnto him, Sonne, thou
w.ist ever with me, and all that I have
is thine.

32 It was mete that we shuldc make
mery, and be glad ; for this thy l)rothcr
was deed, and is a live agaync ; and was
loste, and is fouudc.

380

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

Chap. XVI.

i Qa|mj)-|)an du sipon-
yam seinaim, Mannc sums was gabeigs,
ailita faurai^agixyan ; yah sa fra-
saci
>vrolii})S war}) du iiuina, ei distahidcdi
aigin is.

2 Yah atwopyands ina, qa)? du imma,
Duwhe })ata hausya fram ))us 1
usgif
ra))yon fauragaggyis |)einis, ni magt auk
yu jjanamais fauragaggya wisau.

Chap. XVI.

'•^i Da cwa?}> lie to his
leorning-cnihtum, Sum wolig man wa-s,
se ha^fde sumne gerefan ; se wear}? wicl
hine forwreged, swylce he his god for-
spilde.

2 Da clypode be hine, and ssede him,
Hwi gehyre ic dis be de 1 agyf dine
scire, ne miht dii leng tdn-scire bewitan.

3 Qa|^ ])an 'in sis sa fauragaggya, Wha
tauyau, }>aiulci frauya meins afninii}^ faur-
agaggi af mis 1 graban ni mag, bidyan
skama mik.

3 Da cw8e]> se gerefa on his ge|)ance,
Hwjct do ic, fordam de min hlafurd
mine geref-scire fram me nimj) 1 ne maeg
ic delfan, me sceama}> doet ic waedligc.

4 Andjjahta mik wha tauyau, ei )?an
bi))e afsatyaidau us fauragaggya, and-
nimaiiia mik in gardins seinans.

5 Yah atliaitands ainwharyanoh faihus-
kuUuie frauyins seinis, qa)> |>amma frum-
istin, Whan filu skalt frauyin meinam-
ma]

6 paruh qa]^, Taihuntaihund kase al-
ewis. Yali cpij^ du imma, Nim ))us l)okos,
yah gasitauds
fimf
tiguns.

gamclei

sprauto,

pajn'oh

|)an du anjiaramma qa|),

7

A))l)an )ni whan filu skalt?
l]> "is qa|>,
Yah
Taihuntaihund mitade
qaj) du 'imma, Nim |?us bokos, yah
melei ahtautchund.

kaurnis.

8 Yah hazida sa frauya jjana fauragagg-
yan i'nwindijjos, unte frodaba gatawida ;
untc
frodozans
6unum liuhadis
in kunya seinamma
sind.

j)is aiwis

snnyos

|)ai

4 Ic wat hwaet ic do, da^t hig me on
hyra hils onfon, donne ic bescired beo
fram tiin-scire.

5 Da da gafol-gyldan gegadcrode waer-
on, da ssede he dam forman, II u my eel
scealt du minum hlaforde ]

6 Da Stcde he, Hund sestra eles. Da
sjrde he him, Nim dine federe, and site
hrade, and writ fiftig.

7 Da Stcde he odrum, II li myccl scealt
du 1 Da cwse]) he, Hund mittcna Inva^t-
Da cwa^j) he, Nim dine stafas, and
cs.
writ hund-eahtatig.

tun-gerefan, fordam do

8 Da herede se hlaford da^re unriht-
he
wisnesse
gleawlicc dyde ; fordam dc dissc woruldc
beam synd glcawran
leohtes
bcarnura on disse cneoresse.

disscs

9 Yah 'ik izwis qij'a,

tanyaij) izwis
friyonds us faihujjraihna inwindi|)os, ei
J)an ufligai}>, andnimaiua "izwis iu aiw-
cinos hlcij'ros.

9 And ic sccge cow, wyrcaj' cow frCud
of dissc woruldc-wclan unrihtwisncsse,
d{\?t hig onfon eow on ece eardung-
stowa, donne ge geteoriaj).^

10 Saci triggws 'ist 'in leitilamma, yali
'in managamma triggws "ist
; yah sa in
leitilamma untriggwa, yah in managam-
ma untriggws ist.

11 Yabai nu in inwindamma faihu})-
railina triggwai ni waur|>u|», j^ata sun-
yeino whas izwis galaubei|' ?

12 Yah yabai in jnimma frama)'yin
triggwai ni waur|ni|>, j-ata izwar whas
"izwis gibij)]

I o Se de ys on lytlum getry we, se ys on
maran getry we; and se de ys on lytlum
un-
unriht^\^s,

se ys eac on miiran

rihtwis.

II Gif ge on unrihtwisum wcoruld-
wclan nafron getrywe, hwa bctaccjj eow
dat cower ys 1

I 2 And gyf ge on frcmedum naron

getrywe, hwa sylp eow d^et eower ys ?

13 Ni ainshun )>iwc mag twaim frau-

13 Nc mccg nan |)COW twam hlafordum

1

1

;

XVI. I-I3.] WYCLTFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

381

Chap. XVI. i Forsothe he seide also
to his disciplis, Ther was sum riche man,
that hadde a fermour ;'' and this was
defamyd anentis him^ as he hadde wastid
his goodis.

2 And he clepide him, and seide to
him, What heere I this thing of tliee 1
5eld resoun of thi ferme, for now thou
schalt not mowe holde thi ferme.

3 Forsoth the fermour seide with ynne
him silf, What schal I do, for my lord
takith awey fro me the ferme I
I may
not delue, I am aschamyd to begge.

4 T woot what I schal do, that whanne
I schal be remouyd fro the ferme, thei
rece}Tie me in to her housis.

5 And alle the dettours of the lord
clepid to gidere, he seide to the firste,
Hou moche owist thou to my lord 1

6 And he seide to him. An hundrid
And he seide to him,
barelis of oyle.
Taak thin obligaciouu, and sitte soon,
and wryt fyfti.

7 Aftirward he seyde to another, Sothli
hou moche owist thou 1 Which seide,
An hundrid mesuris of whete. And he
seide to him, Tak thi lettris, and wryt
foure score.

8 And the lord preiside the fermour of
wickidnesse, for he hadde don prudently ;
for the sones of this world ben more
prudent in her generacioun than the
sones of li3t.

9 And I scie to 50U, make to 30U
frendes of tlie richesse of wickidnesse,
that whan 30 shulen fayle, thei receyue
50U in to euerlastynge tabernaclis.

10 He that is

fcithful in the leestc
thing, is fcithful also in more ; and ho
that in wickid in a litil thing, is wickid
also in the more.

1

Thcrfore if 5c wcren not trcwe in
wicked riches, who schal bitakc to 30U
this that is verri 1

12 And if 30 wercn not trcwc in alien
thing, who schal 3yue to 30U this that is
joure

13 No man seruaunt may serue twcy

Chap. XVI.

i He sayd also vnto
his disciples, There was a certayne rich
man, which had a stewarde, that was
acused vnto him, that he had wasted his
goodes.

2 And he called him, and said vnto
him, Howe is it that I heare this of the 1
geve a comptes off thy steward shippe,
for thou mayste be no longer my stew-
arde.

3 The stewarde said with in him silfe.
What shall I do, for my master will
take a waye from me my stewarde
I cannot digge, and to begge
shippe 1
I am a shamed.
4 I woote what to do, that when I am
put out of my stewardshippe, they maye
receave me in to there houses.

5 Then called he all his masters detters,
and sayd vnto the fyrst, Howe moche
owest thou vnto my master 1

6 And he sayd, An hondred tonnes of
And he sayd to him. Take thy
oyle.
billj and sitt doune quickly, and write

fiftie.

7 Then said he to another. What owest
thou 1 And he sayde. An hondred quar-
ters of wheate. He sayd to him, Take
thy bill, and writte foure scoore.

8 And the lorde commended the vniust

stewarde, because he had done wysly
for the chyldren of this worlde are in
their kynde wyscr then the chyldren off
light.

9 And I saye also vnto you, make you
frendes of the wicked mammon, that
when ye shall have nede, they may
receave you into
everlastinge habita-
cions.

10 He that is faithful in that wiche is

leste, the same is faithful in moche .

.

.

1 1 So then if yc have not byn faithfiill
in the wicked mannnon, who will bclcvo
you in that which is true 1

T2 And if yc have not bone faithfull in
another nianncs busincs, whoo shall gcvo
you youre awnc 1

13 No scrvaunt can serve two masters;

382

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

;

yam skalkinon ; andizuh ainana fiyaij>,
ai})J)au ainamma
yah an|>arana friyo]) ;
Ni
ancltiloj>,
magu)) Gu))a skalkinon yah faihu])raih-
na.

aii))arainma frakann.

'i\)

J'cowian ; odde he anne hataj>, and
oderne lufa]> ; odde lie jinum folga}),
and oderne forhoga)>. And ge ne magou
Gode ])COwian and wcoruld-wclan.

14 Gahausidctlun j^an j'O alia yah j>ai
failiufrikai wisandans, yah

Fareisaieis,
bimanipidc'dun nia.

15 Yah qa|) du im, Yiis siyii]', }iizei
garaihtans domei}) I'zwis silbans in and-
wairjjya mannc ;
ij) Gu[) kann hairtona
izwara, unte |)ata hauho 'in mannam,
andaset in andwairjjya Gujjs.

16 Wito)) yah praiifeteis und lohannen;
Jjajjroh })iudangardi Guf's wailameryada,
yah whazuh in izai nau))yada.

14 Das )nng ealle da Farisei gehyrdon,
da de gifre waeron, and hig hine tseldon.

15 Da cwaej? he to him, Ge synd, de
eow-sylfe beforan mannum gerihtwisiaj?
s6j)lice God can eowre beortan, fordam
de beforan Gode ys ascuniendlic, diet
mannum hcah ys.

16 Seo se and witegan od lohannem ;
and of him is bodod Godes rice, and
ealle on diet strangnesse wyrcaj).

17

I|) azetizo

hindarleij'an,
gadriusan.

ist himin yah air|)a
})au witodis ainana writ

18 Whazuh sa afletands qen seina, yah
liugands anj^ara, horinojj ; yah whazuh
saei afleitana liugaij), horinoj).

19 Aj-jian manne sums was gahigs, yah
gawasids was paurpaurai, yah bwssaun,
yah waila wisands daga whammeh bairh-
taba.

20 I|) unleds sums was, namin haitans
Lazarus, sah atwaurpans was du daura
is banyo fulls,

21 Yah gnirnida sa]' itan drauhsno,
|)izo driusandeino af biuda ))is gabeigins,
; akei yah hundos atrinnandans,

bilaigodcdun banyos is.

22 War|> jian, gaswiltan ))amma un-
iu
Gaswalt ))an yah sa

Icdin, yah
barma Abrahamis.
gabciga, yah gafulhans warji.

biiggan fram a;jji,nlum

23 Yah in lialyai ushafyands augona
fecina, wisands in balweinim, gasawh
j'an Abraham fairraJTO, yah Lazzaru
in biuinim is.

24 Yah is ulhropyands,

17 Eadre is diet heofen and corJ>e
daere x

gewiton, donne an stief
fealle.

of

18 ^'Ic man de his w'f forlaet, and
oder nim)>, se unriht-bscm}) ; and se de
unriht-
dt«t

wif nimj),

forlcctene

se

hccmj).^

19 Sum welig man woes, and he wn?s
gescryil n\id purpuran, and mid twine,
and da^ghwamlice riclice gewistfullode.

20 And sum wredla wa'S, on naman
la?g on his dura swyde

Lazarus, se
for\^'undod,

21 And wilnode d.Tt he hine of his
crnmum gefylde, de of his beodo feollon,
and him nan man ne sealde ; ac hiind-
as comon, and his wunda liccedon.

22 Da waes geworden, daet se wfedla
forji-ft'rdc, and hine englas btcron on
Abrahames groadan.
D.i wear|) se wel-
cga dead, and wa^s on belle gebyrged.

23 Da aliof he his eagan upp, da he
on dam tintreufum
wa\s, and siosoah
feorran Abraham, and Lazarum on his
greadan.

24 Da hrymde he and cwa^{>, Eala
fanler Abraham, gemiltsa me, and send
Lazarum, da^t he dyppe his fingeres li|>
on wa^tere, and mine tungan gccacle ;
fordam de ic com on dis lige cwylmed.

4
6

;

4
6
7
1

XVI. 14-24] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

383

lord is ; forsotlie ether he schal hate oon,
and loue the tothir ; ether he schal cleiie
3^ mown
to oon, and dispise the othir.
not serue to God and to riches.

for other he shall hate the one, and love
the other ; or els he shall lene to the
one, and despyse the other. Ye cannot
serve God and mammon.

1

Forsoth Farisees, that weren ooueyt-
ouse, herden alle thes thingis, and thei
scornyden him.

15 And he seide to hem, 3® it ben,
that iustifyen 50U bifore men ;
sothli
God knowith ^oure hertis, for that thing
hi^ to men, is abominacioun
tliat
anemptis God.

is

1

The lawe and prophetis til to John ;
fro that tyme the rewme of God is
prechid, and ech man makith violence
in to it.

17 Forsothe it

is li3ter heiiene and
erthe to passe ouer, than o titil falle fro
the lawe.

18 Ech man that forsakith his wyf,
and weddith another, doith auoutrie ;
and he that weddith the w'lff forsakun
of the hosebonde, doith auoutrie.

19 Sum man was rich, and was clothid
in purpur, and biys,""" and he eet ech day
schynyngli.

20 And ther was sum beggere, Lazarus
by name, that lay ful of bylis at his
3ate,

21 Coueytinge to be fillid

of the
crummes, tliat felden doun fro the riche
niannis boord, and no man ^af to him ;
but and houndis camen, and lickiden his
bylis.

22 Forsothe it was don, that the beg-
gere deiede, and was borun of aungels
in to Abrahams bosum.
Forsothe and
the riche man is deed, and is biried in
helle.

23 Forsothe he

y^en,
whanne lie was in turmontis, Hy3 Abra-
ham a fer, and Lazarus in his bosum.

rcysinge his

24 And lie criyngc scydc, Fadir Abra-
ham, haue mercy on me, and send Laza-
rus, that he dippe the liiste i)art of his
fyngur in watir, and kck; my tunge
for I am turmcutid in tlii.s nuwmc.

1

All these thinges herde the Pharises
also, which were coveteous, and they
mocked him.

15 And he sayd vnto them, Ye are
they, which iustifie youre selves before
men ; but God knoweth youre hertes,
for that which men magnifie, is abhomi-
nable in the sight of God.

1

The lawe and the prophettes raygned
vntyll the tyme of Jhon ; sence that
tyme the kyngdom of God is preached,
and every man stryveth to goo in.

1

Soner shall heven and erth perisshe,
then won title of the lawe shall perisshe.

18 Whosoever forsaketh his wyfe, and
marieth another, breaketh matrimony ;
and every man which marieth her that
is divorsed from her husbande, com-
mitteth advoutry also.

19 There was a certayne riche man,
which was clothed in purple, and fyne
raynes, and fared deliciously every daye.

20 And there was a certayne begger,
name Lazarus, whiche laye at hys gate
full off soores,

2

Desyrynge to be refresshed with
the cromes, whiche fell from the ryche
mannes horde,
; nevcrthelcsse the
dogges cam, and licked his soores.

22 And yt fortuned, that the begger
dyed, and was carryed by the angelles
The riche man
into Abrahams bosome.
also died, and was buried in hell.

23 When he Hfte vp])e his eyes, as he
was in tourmcntcs, he sawe Al)raham a
farre off, and Lazarus in his bosome.

24 And crycd and sayd, Fatlicr Abra-
ham, have mercy on me, and sendc
Lazarus, tliat he mayc dcj)e the tipjic
off Ills fyngcr in water, and cole my
tonge ;
this
flame.

fur 1 am tourmciitcd in

3^4

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

25 Da cwaijj Ahraliani, Eala

suim,
^e[)enc, diet du god onfeiige 011 diiium
life, and gelice Lazarus onfeng yfel ; nii
ys des gefrefrod, and du eart cwylnied.

26 And on eallum dissum betweox us
and eow is mycel dwolma getrynied ;
da de willa}) heonon to eow faran, ne
magon, ue danou faran hidere.

27 Da cw?e)> he, Faeder, ic bidde de,
daet du seude hine to mines fitder buse.

28 Ic liaibbe fif gebrodru, d:et be cydc
bim, diet big ne cunion on dissa tintrcga
stowe.

29 Da saede Aljrabam byra, Hig bal)-
baj) Moysen and witegan ; big blystou
bim.

30 Da cwnej) be, Nese, fanler Abraliam,
ac big d6)> daed-bote, gif bwylc of dea|'e
to bim fafr}>.

31 Da cwoej) he, Gif big ne gehyraj)
Moysen and da witegan, ne hig ne ge-
lyfa}), deab bwylc of dea})e arise.

Chap. XVII.

^ i Da cwa^j) be to liis
leorning-cnibtum, Unmibtlic is da-t ge-
drefednyssa ne cumon ; wa dam, de big
|)urh cumajj.

2 Nyttre him wacre, daet an cweorn-
stan sy gecnyt abutan his sweoran, and
si on sap beworpen, donne be gedrefde
anne of dyssum lytliui^aim.

3 Warniaj) eow ; gyf din brodor syng-

aj), cid hym ;

3 .

.

.

.

,

. yahai frawaurkyai brojmr
yabai

iinma ;

yuli
)jeins,
i'dreigo sik, fralctais imuia.

jjjasak

|'aii

4 Yah yabai sibun sinjiam ana dng

4 And gif he on d.Tg seofen sidnm
frawaurkyai du |)U3, yah sibun sinjmm ' synga)>, and seofen sidum to de on da^g
gecyrred byj), and cwyj), Hit me of-
ana dag gawandyai sik, 4i|)ands, Idrcigo
\>^^^\>, forgyf hit him.
mik, fralctais imma.

5 Yah qejmn apaustauleis du Frauyin,

5 Da ewaedon his apostolas, Drihten,

Biauk uns galaul)ein.

I g<^yc virne geleafan.

6 Qi\]} j)an Frauya, Yabai babaidedei|) '

galaubeiu swc kauriio sinnpis,
aij'|)au
yus yabai (pj'ci)) du bairabagnui jjamma,

6 Da cwa^|> Uriliten, Gif ge b.Tfdon
geleafan swa senepes corn, ge sanlon
dissum treowe, Sy dii awyrtwalod, and

VI. 25.-XVII. 6.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

385

25 And Abraham seide to him, Sone,
haue mynde, for thou hast receyued
good thingis in thi l3rf, and Lazarus also
sothli he is now com-
yuele thingis ;
fortid, but thou art turmentid.

26 And in alle thes thingis a gi'eet
derk place"'" is stablischid by twixe vs
and 30U ; that thai that wolen fro hennis
to 50U, mown not, nether fro
passe
theunis passe ouer hidur.

27 And he seide, Therfore I preye
thee, fadir Abraham, that thou sende
him in to the hous of my fadir.

28 For I haue fyue bretheren, that he
witnesse to hem, lest also thei come in
to this place of turmentis.

29 And Abraham seide to him, Thei
han Moyses and the prophetis ; heere
thei hem.

30 And he seide, Nay, fadir Abraham,
but if ony of deede men schal go to
hem, thei schulen do penaunce.

31 Forsothe he seyde to him. If thei
heere not Moyses and the prophetis,
neither if ony of deede men schal ryse
a3cn, thei schulen bileue to him.

25 Abraham sayd vnto hym, Sonne,
remembre, that thou in thy lyfetyme
receavedst thy pleasure, and contrary
wyse Lazarus payne ; nowe therfore is he
comforted, and thowe art punnysshed.

26 Beyonde all this bitwene you and
vs there is a greate space sett ; so that
they which wolde goo from hence to
you, canot, nether from thence come
bidder.

27 And he sayd, I praye the therfore,

father, send him to my fathers housse.

j

j

28 For I have fyve brethren, for to
warne them, lest they also come into
this place off tourment.

29 Abraham sayd vnto hym, They have
lett them

Moses and the prophettes ;
heare them.

30 And he sayd, Naye, father Abraham,
but yf won from the ded cam vnto
them, they wolde repent.

31 He sayd vnto hym, Yf they heare
not Moses and the prophetes, nether
woll they beleve, though won roose from
deeth agayne.

Chap. XVII.

i And he seide to his
disciplis, It is inpossible that sclaundris
come not ; but woo to him, by whom
thei comen.

2 It is more profitable to him, if a
mylne stoon be put a boute his necke,
and he be caat in to the see, than that
he sclaundre oon of thes litle.

3 Take 3c heede to 30U silf ; if thi bro-
ther hath synned a3en8 thee, blame him ;
and if he schal do penaunce, for3yue to
him.

4 And if seuene sithis in the day he
Bchal synne a3onH thee, and seuene sithis
in the day he schal be conucrtid to
thee, seyinge. It forthenkith me, for3yuc
to him.

5 And the postlis seiden to the Lord,

Encrcessc fcith to vs.

6 Forsoth the Lord Hey<lc, If 3c schulen
haue feith as the corn of syncuey, 30
Bchulcn scyc to this more tree, Be thou

Chap. XVII.

i Then sayde he to
his disciples, It can not be avoyded but
that occasions of evyll come ; neverthe-
lesse wo be to hym, throw whom they
come.

2 It were better for hym, if a mylstone
wer hanged aboute his necke, and that
he were cast into the see, rather then he
shulde oflfende won off this litle wons.

3 Take hede to youre selves ;

if thy
agaynst the, rebuke

brother
hym ; and if he repent, forgeve hym.

trespas

4 And though he syn agenst the seven
tymes in won dayc, and seven tymcs in
a daye tourne agayne to the, sayinge, It
repenteth mc, forgeve hym.

5 And the apostles sayde vnto the

Lorde, In crease cure fayth.

6 The Lorde sayde, Yf ye had fayth
lyke a graync off mustard scde, and
bhuldc saye vnto thys sycainyue tree,

c c

;

1

;

;

38G

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

Uslausei |>uk us waiirtim, yah ussatci
|)uk in niareiu, yah andhausidcdi pau
izwis.

7 Whas I'an izwara skalk ai^^ands ar-
yandan, aij^JKUi hahlandan, saei atga*;*:^-
andin af haijjyai, qi|>ai, Suns, hindarleij),
anuhkumbci

j

aplantod on sae, and hit hyrsumode
cow.

7 Hwylc eower hsef}> ercgendne )>eow,
octde seep la^sgendne, dam, of dam lecere
gehworfenum, he him sona segj), Ga,
and site

8 Ak niu qi}^i)> du imma, Manwei,
wha du naht matyau, yah bigaurdans,
andbalitci mis, unte matya yah drigka,
yah bi])e gamatyis yah gadrigkais jju ;

8 And ne segj) him, Gearwa, daet ic
ete, and g)Td de, and ))ena me, da
hwyle de ic ete and drince, and syddan
dii ytst and drincst

9 Iba jjank })us fairhaitis skalka yain-
amma, unte gatawida j^atei anabudan
was?

Ni man.

10 Swa yah yus |)an tauyai]> alia \)0
auabudanona izwis, qi)?aij), patei skalk-
os unbrukyai siyum, unte j^atei skul-
dcdum tauyan gatawidedum.

9 Wenst dii

hrefj) se ])eowa jenigne
Jjanc, fordam de he dyde diet him bobod-
en waes ?

Ne, wene ic.

beboden

10 Swii ys eow donne ge doj) call da-t
eow
cweda|>, Unnytte
J)eowas we synd, we dydon diet we don
sceoldon."'^

ys,

T I Yah war)),

mi]?|?anei iddya is in

1

Da he ferde to Hierusalem, he code

lairusalem, yah is
jjairhiddya
midya Samarian, yah Galeilaian.

Jjairh

})urh midde Samarian, and Galileam.

12 Yah inn":an:<i:andin imma in suma
haimo, gamotidedun imma taihun jjruts-
fillai niuus, jjaih gastojjun fairra))ro,

13 Yah silbans ushofon stibna, qi)>-

andans, lesu, talzyand, armai unsis.

12 And da l:e eode on sum castel, him
agen urnon tyn hreofe weras, da stodon
big feorran,

13 And hyra stefna up-ilhofon, and
cwiA:don, Haelend, bebeodend, gemiltsa

14 Yah gaumyands, qa)? du im, Gagg-
Yah
gahrainidai

andans, ataugei]? izwis gudyam.
war]),

mi])j)anei

gali|)un,

us.

14 Da he big geseah, da cwa^)> he,
Ga|), and setywaj) eow dam sacerdum.
Da hig ferdon, big wurdon geclaensode.

waur|)un.

15 Ij) ains jjan ize, gaumyands j^ammci
brains warji, gawandida sik, mi]) stibnai
niikihd liauhyands Gu]i.

15 Da hyra an geseah, dset he ge-
clacnsod wa?s, da cyrde he, mid mycelre
stetiie God macrsiende.

16 Yah draus ana andawlcizn faura
fotum is, awiliudonds imma ; sab was
Samarcites.

17 Andhafyands j)an lesus qa}>, Niu

taihun |>ai gahrainidai waurj^un, i|>
niun whar 1

\>i\[

18 Ni bigitanai waurjjun, gawandyand-
ans, giban >vid))U Gu]ni, niba sa alya-
kunya.

*

19 Yah (ja|) du imma, Usstandands,

gagg ; galaubeins jjcina ganasida }>uk.

20 Fraihans

Fareisaium,
whan qimij> |>iudangardi Gu}>s, andhof

}'an

fram

16 And feoU to hys fotum, and h}in

jjancode ; and des Wa?s Samaritanisc

17 Da cwx\> se Haelend him and-
swariendo, TTu ne synd tyn geclaensode,
hw;er synd da nigone 1

18 Nivs gemet, se de agen-hwurfe, and
des jel-

Gode wuldor sealde, biiton
fremeda.

1 9 Da cw£ej) be, A'ris, and ga ; fordam

de din geleafa de halne gedyde.

20 Da acsodon bine da Farisei, hwcen-
ne Godes rice come, da andswarode he,

1

3
1

;

8

;

;

XVII. 7-20.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

387

drawuii vp by the roote, and be plauntid
ouer in to the see, and it schal obeye to
50U.

7 Forsothe who of 50U hauynge a ser-
uaunt eringe, other lesewynge oxun,
which seith to him, turnyd a^en fro the
feeld, Anoon go, and sitte to mete ;

8 And seith not to him, Make thou
redy, that I soupe, and girde thee, and
mynystre to me, til I ete and drynke,
and aftir thes thingis thou schalt ete
and drynke

9 Wher he hath grace to that seruaunt,
for he dide this that he comaundide to
him ] Nay, I gesse.

10 So also 3e whanne ^e han don alle
thingis that ben comaundid to 50U, seie
5e, We ben vnprofitable seruauntis, we
han don this that we oujte to do.

1

And it was done, the while Jhesu
wente in to Jerusalem, he passide thorw
the myddel of Samarie, and of Galilee.

12 And whanne he entride in to sum
castel, ten leprouse men camen a3ens
him, whiche stoode afer,

And reyside the vois, seiynge, Jhesu,

1

comaundour, haue mercy on vs.

14 Whiche as he sy^, he seide, Go ^e,
Bchewe 5e 30U to prestis. And it was
don, the while thei wenten, thei weren
clensid.

15 Forsothe oon of hem, as he sy3 for
he was clensid, wente a3en, magnyfiynge
God with greet vois.

16 And he felde doun in to the face
bifore his feet, doynge thankingis ; and
this was a Samaritan.

17 Forsothe Jhesu answeringe seide,
Wlier ten ben not clensid, and where
ben the nync?
18 Noon is

foundun, tliut turnyde
a3cn, and 3af glorie to God, no but this
alien.

19 And he seith to him, llysc thou, go
thou ; for thi feith liath niutid tliee suuf

20 Forsothe he axid

of I'harisccH,
whanne the rcwnic of God comcth, au-

Plucke thy silfe vppe by the rotes, and
plant thy silfe in the see, he shoulde
obey you.

7 Which of you havynge a servaunte a
plowynge, or fedynge catell, wolde saye
vnto hym, when he were come from the
felde. Goo quickly, and sitt doune to
meate

8 And rather sayeth not to hym, Dresse,
wherwith I maye suppe, and apoynt thy
silfe, and serve me, tyll I have eaten
and dronken, and afterwarde eate thou
and drynke thou

9 Doeth he thanke that servaunt, be-
cause he did that which was commaunded
vnto hym ? I trowe not.

10 Soo lykewyse ye when ye have done
all thoose thynges which are commaunded
vnto you, saye. We are vnprofitable ser-
vauntes, we have done that which was
oure duety to do.

11 And it chaunsed, as he went to
Jerusalem, that he passed thorowe Sa-
maria, and Galile.

12 And as he entred into a certayne
toune, there met hym ten men that were
lepers, which stode a farre of,

13 And put forth their voices, and

sayde, Jesu, master, have mercy on vs.

14 When he sawe them, he sayde vnto
them. Goo, and shewe youre selves to
the prestes. And hit chaunsed, as they
went, they were clensed.

15 And won of them, when he sawe
that he was clensed, turned backe a-
gayne, and with a loudc voice praysed
God.

16 And fell doune on his face at his
fete, and gave hym thank es ; and the
same was a Samaritan.

17 Jesus answered and sayde. Are there
not ten clensed, but were are tliosc
nyne ?

1

There are not founde, that returned
agane, to geve God prayse, save only
this straiiiiger.

19 And he sayde vnto hym, Arysc,
tliy fayth hath

and goo thy waye ;
saved the.

20 When he was dcniiiundcd od" tlio
rimriscs, when the kyngdoni oft' God

C u 2

;

1

;

;

388

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

im, yah qaj>, Ni ([imijj
Guj)S mijj atwitainai,

|)iu(langarcli

and cwiej), Ne cymj) Godcs rice mid
bcgymene,

21 Nih qij^and, Sai !

her, ai|>})au sai !
yainar ; sai ! auk j>iudaugardi Gu]?s in
izwis 1st.

22 Qa)j jjan du siponyam, A})))an qim-
and dagos, })an gairnci{> ainana pize dage
simaiis mans gasaiwlian, yah ui
ga-
saiwliij).

2

Ne liig ne cw^edaj), Efne ! licr hyt
ys, odde dar ; Godes rice is bctwynan
cow.

22 Da cw£e]> he to his leoming-cniht-
um. Da dagas cumap, donne ge ge-
wihiia)) diet ge geseon senne diug man-
nes suna, and ge ne geseoj).

23 Yah qijjand "izwis, Sai ! her, aij^j^au
laist-

Ni galci])ai]), nih

sai ! yainar.

23 And hig secga}? cow, Her lie

is,

and dar he is. Ne fare ge, ne ne fyliaj)

yai|>;

24 Swaswe raihtis laiihmoni lauhat-
yandei us Jjamma uf hiniina "in jjata uf
hiniina skeini}?, swa wairj>i]) suuus mans
in daga seinamma.

24 "Witodlice swa se lig-r?5sc lylitende
scinj> under hcofone on da |»iiig de
under heofone synd, swa bij? mannes
sunu on his dsege.

25 Ajjjjan faurjjis skal manag ga))ulan,

yah uskiusada fram J>amma kunya.

26 Yah swaswe war]) "in dagam Nauel-
is, swah wair|)i]) yah "in dagam suuaus
mans.

27 Etun yah drugkun, liugaidedun,
yah liugaidos wesun, und jjanei dag
yali qam mid-
gahiij) Naucl in arka ;
yasweipains, yah fraqistida allans.

25 ^'ryst him gebyrej) da?t he fehi
jjinga I'oHge, and beon fram disse cneor-
ysse aworpen.

26 And swa on Noes dainim waes jre-
worden, swa beo)) mannes suna to-
cyme.

27 Hig seton and druncon, and wifodon,
and waeron to gyftum gcsealde, od done
djrg de Noe on earce code ; and flod
com, and ealle forspikle.

28 Samaleiko yah swe war|> in dagam
Lodis, ctun yah drugkun, bauhtedun
yah tVabaulitedun, satidedun tiniridcdun

29 T|) |>ainmci daga usiihlya Lod us
Saudauiniiii, rignida swihla yah funin
us himina, yah f"ra(pstida alhiini.

28 Eall-swa woes geworden on Lo)>cs
aeton and druncon, and
daguni, hig
bohton and scaklon, and phxntcdun and
timbrcdon

29 S6))licc on dam dx^^c de Lo}) code
of Sodoma, liyt rinde fyr and swcfl of
hcofone, and ealle forspilde.

30 Bi })ainma wairj)i}), jiamnui daga ci

sunus mans andhulyada.

30 iEftcr dysum j)ingum ]n\\ on dam

da>ge de mannes sunu ouwrigen bij?.

31 In yainamma daga saci siyai ana
hrota, yah kasa is in razna, ni atsteigai
dahij) niman \>o ; yah saei ana hai|>yai,
samaleiko ni gawandyai sik ibukana. .

.

31 On dam da^ge se de bi}) on })cccnc,
and his fatu on hiisc, ne stih}) he nydcr
da3t he hig nime ; and se de bij) on
aiccrc, ne went he on-ba:c

32 Gamuncij) qenais Lodis.
33 tSac'i sokcij) saiwala scina ganasyan,
fi-a(listei|) izai ; yah saei fraqisteij) izai
"in nu'ina, ganasyij) jx).
34 Qi['u izwis, [nitoi

|)izai naht twai
wair])aud ana ligra samiu, aius usnini-

32 Beo|> gc niyndigc Loj^cs wifcs.
33 Swa hwylc swa sccj) his sawie ge-
don hale, se hig forspilj); and swa hwylc
swa hig forspil|), se hig gcliffa>sta|>.

34 S6))licc ic cow sccgc, on da^-c nihtc
bcoj) twcgcn on beddc, an byj) gcnumcQ,

;

;

;

XVII. 2 1-34.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

389

sweride to hem, and seide, The rewme
of God Cometh not with aspying,

21 Nethir thei schulen seye, Lo ! here,
ether lo ! there ; forsothe lo ! the rewme
of God is with ynne 50U.

22 And he seide to his disciplis, Dayes
schulen come, whanne ^e schulen desyre
to se o day of mannis sone, and ^e
schulen not se.

23 And thei schulen seye to 50U, Lo !
here, and lo ! there. Nyle 3e go, nether
sue 5e

24 For as leit schynynge fro vndir
heuene schyneth on thoo thingis that
ben vndir heuene, so mannis sone schal
be in his day?

25 Forsothe first it bihoueth him to
suffre many thingis, and to be reproued
of this generacioun.

26 And as it was don in the dayes of
Noe, so it schal be in the dayes of mannis
sone.

27 Thei eeten and drunken, and wed-
diden wyues, and weren ^ouun to wed-
dingis, til in to the day in which Noe
entride in to his schip ; and the greet
flood cam, and loste alle.

28 Also as it was don in the dayes of
Loth, thei eeten and drunken, bou3ten
and seelden, plantiden and byldeden ;

29 Sothli in what day Loth wentc out
of Sodom, the Lord reynede fier and
brymstoon fro heuene, and loste alle.

30 Vp this thing it schal be, in what

day mannis sone schal be schcwid.

31 In that our he tliat schal ])c in the
roof, and liis vesels in tlie lious, come
he not doun to take hem awei ; and he
that 8chal be in the feeld, also turne not
a3cn bihyndc

shulde come, he answered them, and
sayde. The kyngdom of God commeth
not with waytingefore,

21 Nether shall men saye, Loo ! here,
loo ! there ; for beholde ! the kyngdom
of God is within you.

22 And he sayde vnto hys disciples.
The dayes will come, when ye shall de-
sire to se won daye of the sonne of man,
and ye shall not se it.

23 And they shall saye to you, Se I
Goo nott after them,

here, se ! there.
nor folowe them

24 For as the lighteuynge that apereth
out of the one parte of the heven and
shyneth vnto the other parte of heven,
soo shall the sonne of man be in his
dayes.

25 But fyrst must he suffre many
thinges, and be reproved of this nacion.

26 As it happened in the tjmie of Noe,
soo shall it be in the tyme of the sonne
of man.

27 They ate they dranke, they maryed
yvjves, and were maryed, even vnto that
same daye that Noe went into the arke ;
and the floud cam, and destroyed them

all.

28 Likewise also as it chaunsed in the
dayes of Lot, they ate, thei dranke, thei
bought, thei soldo, thei planted, they
bilte

29 And even the same daye that Lot
went out of Zodom, hit rayned fyre and
brymstone from heven, and destroyed
them all.

30 After these ensamplcs shall the
daye be, when the sonne of man shall
apere.

toppc, and his

31 Att that daye he that is on the
in the
housse
housse, lett hym nott come dounc to
take hit out; and lyke wysc Ictt not
him that is in the fcldcs, turnc backe
agayne to that he Icftc ])chyndc hym.

stuffo

32 P>o 3c myndcful of tlic wyf of Loth.
33 Who cucrc schal sckc to make his
lyf saf, schal Iccsc it ; and wlio cucrc
schal Iccsc it, schal (luykcnc it.

34 I seye to 30U, in that ni^t twcync
schulen be in o bed, oon schal be rc-

32 Jlcmembcr Lottcs wyfc.
33 Whosoever will goo about to save
liis lyff, shall loo.sc it ; and whosoever
shall l()OH(; his life, shall (juyckcn it.

34 I tell yon, in that nyglit there shalbe
two in one bccd, the one shalbc rcccavcd,

1

;

;

;

1

;

3f)0

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

ada, yah anjjar bileijjada ;

and oder h\\> forlaeten ;

35 Twos wair})and nialandeius samana,

aina usnimada, yah anjjara bileipada

35 Twa bco}) a^tgaedere grindende, an

bi)) genumen, and oder bij) Isefed ;

37 Yah andliafyandans qej^un du im-
qaj) im,

ma, Wliar, Fraiiya 1
parei leik, yaindre galisand sik arans.

1\>

is

36 Twegen beoj) on a^cere, an bi]? ge-

numen, and oder h\\) laefed.
37 Da cwscdon hig to him, Hwar,
Driliten 1 Da cw.tJ) he, Swa hwar swa
se lichama bij), dyder beoj) earnas ge-
gaderod.

Chap. XVIII.

i Qa|)u|)-j>an yah ga-
yukon im, du j^ammei sinteino skulun
bidyan, yah ni wair|)an usgrudyans

Chap. XVIII.

i Da ssede he him
sum bigspel, daet hit ys riht dtet man
symle gebidde, and na geteorige ;

2 Qi)?ands, Staua was suras 'in sumai
baurg, Gu|> ni ogands, yah mannan ni
aistands.

3 Wasii|)-])an yah widuwo in

|>izai
baurg yainai, yah atiddya du imma,
qij^andei, Fraweit mik ana audasta})ya
meinamma ;

4 Yah ni wilda laggai wheilai.

Afaruj)-
))an )7ata qaj> in sis silbin, Yabai yah
Guj) ni og, yah mannan ni aista,

5 Ij) in |)izei usjjriuti}? mis so widuwo,
j)o ; ibai und audi qimandei

fi'aweita
usagl^ai mis.

6 Qa[) ))an Frauya, HauseiJ), wha staua

inwiudi})os qij'i]?

7 1|) Gu)) niu gawrikai jjans gawalid-
ans scinans, jians woj>yandans du sis
dagam yah nahtam, yah usbeidands ist
ana im 1

8 A|>))an qijia izwis, |)atei gawrikijj ins
J^ swc})auh, sunus mans qim-

sprauto.
ands biugitai galaubein ana airjjai 1

9 Qaji jinn du sumaim, Jiaiei

8ill)ans
trauaidcdun sis,
ei woscina garailitai,
yuli frakunnandans |>aim anjmraim, J)o
gayukon,

10 Mans twai usichlycdun in alli bid-
yan ; ains Farcisaius, yali an)>ar mot-
arcis.

1

Sa Fareisaius standands, sis |>o ])ad,
Gu|>, awiliudo |)us, untc ni Vm swaswc
jai anj)arai mans, wilwans, Vnwindans,

2 And dus cwsej), Sum dema wa?s on
sumere ceastre, se God ne ondred, ne
nanne man ne onj^racode.

3 Da waes sum wuduwe on dserc
ceastre, da com heo to him, and cw;e}^,
Wrec me wid minne wider-winnan ;

4 Da nolde he langre tide. ^Efter dam
. Deah ic God ne on-
da cwaej) he, .
drsede, ne ic man ne onjjracige,

.

5 Deah fordam de deos wuduwe me is
delcTS heo a?t

gram, ic wrece hig ;
ncahstan cume me behropende.

6 Da cwjBJ) Drihten, Gchyra|>, liwiet

se unrihtw^sa dema cwyj)

7 S6|>Hce ne dc)> God liis gccorenra
wrace, clypicndra to him (hvLj:es and
nihtes, and he gejiyhl on him ha'f() ?

8 Ic eow secge, da?t lie rade hyra
wrace de}).
Deah-hw£edere weust dii,
divnne mannes sunu cym)), gemet he
gclcafan on eor))an 1

9 Da cw.t)) lie to sumum dis bigspel,
de on hig sylfe truwedon, and odre
forhogodon,^

10 Twegen men fcrdon to sumum tem-
jin Sundor-

ple da^t hig hig gebccdon ;
halga, and odor manfull.

1

Da stod se Fariseus, and hinc dus
gebnnd, God, de ic |)ancas do, fordatn de
ic lie com swylce odre men, reafcr.as,

;

;

;

XVII. 35.-XVIII. II.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

391

ceyued, and the totlier sclial be for-
sakun
35 Tweye wymmen schulen be grynd-
inge to gidere, oon scbal be receyued,
and the tother schal be forsakun ;

36 Tweyne in a feeld, oon schal be re-

ceyued, the tother schal be forsakun.

37 Thei answeringe seyden to him,
Where, Lord ? Which seide to hem,
Where euere the body schal be, also the
eglis schulen be gederid to gidere thidur.

and the other shalbe forsaken ;

35 Two shalbe also a gryndynge to
gedder, the one shalbe receaved, and the
other forsaken ;

36

37 And they answered and sayde to
him, Wheare, Lorde 1 And he said vnto
them, Whersoever the body shalbe, thid-
ther will the egles resoorte.

Chap. XVIII.

i Forsothe he seide
also a parable to hem, for it bihoueth to
preie euere, and to fayle not

2 Seyinge, Sum iuge was in sum citee,
which dredde not God, nether schamede
of men.

3 Forsothe sum widowe was in that
citee, and sche cam to him, seyinge,
Venge me of myn aduersarie ;

Chap. XVIII. i He put forth a simi-
litude vnto them, signifyinge that men
ought alwayes to praye, and not to be
wery ;

2 Sayinge, There was a iudge in a cer-
taine cite, which feared not God, nether
regarded man.
3 And there was a certayne widdowe^
in the same cite, whych cam vnto hym,
sayinge, Avenge me of myne adversary

i

4 And he wolde not by myche tyme.
Sothli aftir thes thingis he seide with
ynne him silf, Thou3 I drede not God,
and scliame not of man,

5 Netheles for this widowe is heuy^ to
me, I sclial venge hir ; lest at the laste
sche comynge strangle me.

6 Sothli the Lord seide, Heere ^e, what

the domesman of wickidnesse seith ;

7 Forsoth wher God schal not do the
veniaunce of his chosene, criynge to
him ny3t and day, and schal haue pa-
cience in hem %

8 Sothli I seie to 50U, for soone he
Bchal do the veniaunce of hem.
Nethe-
IcH gcssist thou, mannis sone comynge
schal fynde feith in crthc 1

9 Forsoth he seide also to sum men,
that tristiflcn in hem silf, as ri^tful, and
dispiscd<;n otherc, this parable, seyinge,

10 Twryc in«m Hti3cdcn in to the tem-
ple U)T to preie ; oon a rharise, and the
tothir a pupplican.

r I Forsothe; tin; FuriHc stonclinge, j)rai-
ede anentis him silf thes thingis, sey-
inge, God, I do thankingis to thee, for

4 And a greate whyle he wolde noott.
Afterwarde he
hymsilfc.
Though I feare nott God, nor care for
man,

vnto

sayd

5 Yett because this widdowe troubleth
me, I woll a venge her ; lest at the last
she come and rayle on me.

6 And the Lorde sayd, Heare what

the vnrightewes iudge sayeth ;

7 And shall not God avenge his electe,
which crye nyght and daye vnto him ?
ye, though he differre them,

quicly.

8 I tell you, he will avenge them, and
Neverthelesse when the
ye,

that
Sonne of man commeth, su])pose
that he shall fynde faithe on ertlic 1

9 And he put forthe this similitude
vnto ccrtaine, which trusted in them
selves, that they wer perfect, and de-
spysed other.

10 Two men went vp into the temple
to praye ; the one a I'lmrise, and the
other a ])ul)lican.

I I The ]'lmriH(! sttxh;, uiid |»i!iyc(l thus
with hym silfe, God, 1 thaiikc ihc, that I
am nott as other arc,extorsioncrs, vniuste.

302

GOTHIC, 360.

lioros, ai|j])au swaswc sa motareis ;

12 Fasta twaim sinl^am sabLataus, yah
)?ize ga-

afdailya taihundon dail allis
stalda.

13 Yah sa motareis fairra|)ro stand-
ands ni wilda iiih aiigona seina ushaf-
yan du hiniina, ak sloh in brusts seinos,
qi}>ands, Guj? huljjs siyais mis, frawaurht-
amma.

14 Qijja izwis, afiddya sa garaihtoza
cataibans du jjarda seiiiamma bau raiht-
Untc sawhazuh saci haubeij?
is yains.
sik silba gahnaiwyada, i]? saei hnaiwei)?"
sik silba, ushauhyada.

15 Benin ))an du imma barna, ei i'm
attaitoki ; gasaiwhandans Jjan siponyos,
audbitun ins.

16 I|> lesus athaitands ins, qa|>, Letij?
barna gaggan du mis, yah ni waryij)
J)0
\>o, unte ]>ize swalcikaize ist J)iudangardi

Gu})s.

17 Amen qi})a izwis, saei ni andniniij)
jjiudangardya Gu|.s swc barn, ni qimijj
in izai.

18 Yah frah ina sums reike, qi))ands,
Laisari })iujjeiga, wha tauyands libaiuais
aiweinons arbya wairj^au ]

19 Qa}j |)an du imma lesus, AVha mik
Ni ainshun j>iu];eigs,

qi|?is })iu|jeigana ?
niba ains GuJ>.

20 pos anabusnins kant, Ni horinos,
Ni maur|)ryais, Ni Idifais, Ni galiuga-
weitwods siyais, Swerai attan jjeinana
yah aij)cin.

7

;

;

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

unrihtwise,
swylce des manfulla

unriht-hsemeras, odde eac

12 Ic fa^ste tuwa on wucan, ic sylle

teo|)unga ealles daes de ic haibbe.

13 Da stod se munfuUa feorran, and
noldc furdun his eagun jihebban up to
dam heofone, ac he beot bis breost, and
cwae|5, God beo dii milde me, syn-
fullum.

14 S6|)lice ic cow secge, dset des ferdc
. fordam
gerihtwisod to his huse, .
de selc de bine upp-ahef|> bi[> gcnyderod,
atid se de bine nydera}>, byj) upp-aiiafen.

.

15 Da brohton big eild to him, daet
he hifj set-hrinc ; da bis leornin^-cniht-
as big gesawon, big ciddon him.

16 Da clypode se Ilaelend big to him,
and cwaj}>, Lseta}) da lytlingas to me
cuman, and no forbeode ge hig, swylccra
ys Godes rice.

1

S6|)lice ic cow secge, swa liwylc swa
ne onfehjj Godes rice swa swa cild, ne
guejj he on Godes rice.

18 Da acsode bine sum caldor, Godne
ic ece lif

da?t

lareow, liwoet do ic
haibbe ]

19 Da cwsej) se Haclend, Hwi segst du
Nis nan man god, buton

me godne 1
God ana.

20 Canst du da bebodu, Ne ofsloh dii,
Ne fyrena du, Ne stel dii, Ne looh dii,
Wui'j'a dinne fa^der and dine moder.

21 I|> is qa|nih, pata allata gafastaida

21 Da cwa?)) he, Eall dis ic heold of

us yundai meinai.

22 Gahausyands |)nn |iata, lesus qa})
du imma, Nauh ainis j)us wan ist ; all
jmtei habais, frabugei, yah gadailci un-
Icdaim, yali habais huzd in hiniina ; yah
hiri, laistyan mik.

minrc geogu)'0.

22 ... . Da cwa^|> se

llrplcnd, Xn
|)ing de is wana; syle eall da't du ha^fst,
and syle eall diet jicarfum, donne ha^fst
du gold-hord on heofone : and cum, and
foljjfa me.

23 t|) IS gahausyands j^ata, gaurs warji,

was auk gabeigs filu.

24 Gasaiwhands |)an ina lesus gaurana

waur[ianana qa|), Wliaiwa agluba
);ai
failiu habandiins inngahM))and in JMud-
angardya ()}uj>s

;

25 Rajiizo allis

ist

ulbandau jniirh

23 Du he das word gehyrde, he woarj?
ge-unrot, fordam de he wa.\s swide wclig.
24 Da se Hiclend bine unrotne geseah,
lie cwa^|\ Kala hil carfo}>lfcc on Godes
rice gajj da de feoh habba|>

25 EadcHcor mrrg 8c *olfend gan }iurh

8
7
1

;

1

XVIII. 12-25.] WYCLIFFE, 13S9.

TYNDALE, 1526.

393

I am not as otliere men, raueynouris,
vniust, auouters, as also this pupplican ;
12 I faste twyes in the woke, I 5yue
tythis of alle thingis whiche I haue in
possessioun.

13 And the pupplican stondinge a fer
nolde nethir reyse the y5en to heuene,
but smoot his brest, seyinge, God be
mercyful to me, synnere.

14 Treuli I seye to 50U, this cam doun
For ech
in to his hous iustified of him.
that enhaunsith him silf schal be maad
I0U3, and he that mekith him silf, schal
be enhaunsid.

15 Forsothe thei brou5ten to him ^onge

children, that he schulde touch hem
which thing whanne disciplis sy3en, thei
blamyden hem.

16 Sothli Jhesu clepinge to

gidere
hem, seide, Suffre 5e children to come
to me, and nyle ^e forbede hem, for of
siche is the rewme of heuenes.

1

Treuli I seie to 50U, who euere schal
not take the kyngdom of God as a child,
he schal not entre in to it.

1

And sum prince axide him, seyinge,
Good maistir, what thing doynge schal
I welde euerlastyng lyf ?

19 Sothli Jhesu seyde to him. What
scist thou me good ? No man is good,
no but God aloone.

20 Thou knowist the comaundementis,
Tliou schalt not sle, Thou schalt not do
leccherie, Thou schalt not do thefte.
Thou schal not seye fals witnessyng,
Worschij)C fadir and modir.

advoutres, and even as this publican is;

12 I fast twyse in the weke, I geve

tythe of all that I possesse.

13 And the publican stode afarre of
and wolde not lifte vp his eyes to heven,
but smote hys brest, sayinge, God be
mercyfull to me, a sinner.

14 I tell you, this man departed home
to his housse iustified moore then the
For every man that exalteth
other.
him silfe shalbe brought lowe, and he
that humbleth hym silfe, shalbe exalted.
15 They brought vnto him also babes,
that he shulde touche them ; when his
disciples sawe that, they rebuked them.

16 But Jesus called them vnto him,
and sayde, Suffre children to come vnto
me, and forbidde them not, for vnto
souche belongeth the kingdom of God.

17 Verely I saye vnto you, whosoever
receaveth not the kyngdom of God as
a chylde, he shall not enter there in.

18 And a certayne ruler axed him,
sayinge, Goode master, what ought I to
do to obtaine eternall lyfe 1

19 Jesus sayd vnto hym, AVhy callest
thou me goode? No man is goode, save
God only.

20 Thou knowest the commaundmentes,
Thou shalt nott commit advoutry. Thou
shalt nott kill, Thou shalt nott steale,
Thou shalt not
witnes,
Honoure thy father and thy mother.

beare

falce

2

Which seide, I haue kept alle thes

thingis fro my ^outhc.

22 Which thing herd, Jhesu seide to
him, 3it o thing faylith to thee ;
sille
thou uUe, what euere thingis thou hast,
and 3yuo to jjore men, and thou schalt
haue tresour in heuene ; and come, and
Buc me.

23 Thc8 thingis herd, he was sorwful,

for he was ful riche.

24 Sothli Jhesu scingc him maad sorw-
ful seide, How hard thei that han rich-
eHsiH schulen entre in to the rewme of
God ;

25 Forsoth it is csycr a camel to passe

2

And he sayde. All these have I kept

from my youthc.

22 When Jesus herde that, he sayde
vnto hym, Yett lackcst thou one thynge;
sell all that thou hast, and distribute it
vnto the povre, and thou shalt have
in heven ; and come, and
treasure
folowe me.

23 When he hecrd that, he was hevy,

for he was rychc.

24 When JcHUH sawe hym morne ho
sayde, With whuth difficultc sliall ihoy
that have ryches enter into the kyngdom
off ( iod ;

25 Esyer it is for a cammell to pnsso

1

;

1

;

394

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

jjairko nc])los |)airhlci|)an, J^au gabigam-
ma in jjiudangardya Gu|)S L;alei|)au.

26 Qe|nm j>an })ai gahausyaiidaiiS, An

anre nsedle eage, donne se welega on
Godes rice.

26 Da cwsedon da de dis gehyrdon,

whas ma^j <j:anisan ]

27 I|j is qajj, pata immalitcigo at man-

nam, maliteig ist at Gu|>a.

28 Qa|) |)an Paitrus, Sai ! weis aflai-

lotum allata, yah laistidcdum |)uk.

29 Ijj

is qa))uh du ira, Amen qij^a
izwis, jnxtei ni ainslmn ist, |)ize afietand-
ane gard, aijjpau fadrein, ai|>])au bro-
))runs, aij>j>au qen, aij?|)au barna, in |)iud-
angardyos Guj'S,

30 yaei ni andnimai managfal|> in }>am-
ma mela, yah in aiwa jjamma qimandin
libain aiweinon.

3

Ganimands };an |)ans Ab. qaj) du im,
Sai ! usgaggam in lairusalem, yah us-
tiuhada all, })ata gamelido jjairh praufet-
uns bi sunu mans.

32 Atgibada auk jjiudom, yah bilaik-

ada, yah anamahtyada, yah bispeiwada

And hwa moeg hfd boon ?

27 Da ssede he him, Gode synd raihtc-
lice da ]?ing, dc mannum synd unmihte-
Hce.

28 Da cwa^|i Petrus, Ealle |>ing we for-

leton, and folgodon de.

29 Da cwie|) he, S6j)lice ic eow seege,
nis nan man, de his hus forlset, odde
magas, odde brodru, odde wif, odde
beam, for Godes rice,

30 De ne onfo mycele mare on dysse

tide, and ece lif on towerdre worulde.

31 Da nam se Haelend his Icorning-
cnihtas, and cwa?}? to him, Fara}i to Hie-
rusalem, and ealle j>ingbeo}) gefyllede, de
be mannes suna jmrh wltcgan awritene
synd.

32 He by)) })Codum gescald, and bij>
geb}smrod, and geswungcn, and on-
spset

33 Yah usbliggwandans, usqimand im-

ma, yah |>ridyin daga usstandi{).

33 And .Tftcr dam dc hig hinc swingaj),
big hiue ofsleaj), and he Jiriddau da>ge

34 Yah cis ni waihtai j)is froj>un ; yah
was |)ata waurd gafulgin af im, yah ni
"vvisscdun |>o (pjninona.

35 War}) |ian, mij^jianei ncwha was is
liiireikon, blinda sums sat faur wig du
aihtron.

36 Gahausyaiuls |>an managein faur-

gaggandcin, frali, wha wcsi })ata.

37 Gataihun J>an imma, })atei lesus

Nazoraius |'air]j[j^nggi|>.

3vS

\\>

is ul)uhw()i)ida, qi))ands, Icsu,

sunu Daweidis, ai inai niik.

39 Yah |mi faurgaggandans andbitun
i|) is und fihi mais

ina, ci
hropida, Sunau Daweidis, arniai niik.

j^aliaidedi ;

arist.

34 And hig naht da^s ongeton ; and
him dis word wics behydd, ....

35 Da he genealcchtc Hicricho, sum
blind man sa?t wid done weg wanllig-
ende.

36 And dii he gchyrdc da mcTnigco

farcnde, he acsodc, hwa't d;^t wscre.
37 Da saedon hig, dagt da^r ferdc se
Nazarcnisca Hrclcnd.

38 Dii hrvmdc he, and cwa^ji, Eala

Hcvlcnd, l^auides sunu, gemiltsa me.
39 And da de fore-stc'pon hinc })readon,
da't he siiwode ; he da^s de ma clcopode,
Dauidcs sunu, gemiltsa mc.

40 Gastandands )mn Jesus haihait ina
Bij)C uewha was jnui

tiulian du sis.
imma, frah ina,

41 Qij)ands, Wlia jms wilois ci tauyau ?

40 Da stod se Hfclend and hct la'dan
Da he gencahvhte, he

hinc to him.
acsode bine,

4

HwaH wylt du da^t ic de do ? Da

i\> is qa|), Frauya, ci ussaiwhau.

cwa'|) he, Drihten, dait ic geseo.

;

XVIII. 26-41.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

395

thur^ a ne;llis y^e, than a riche man for
to entre in to the kinfjdom of God.

26 And thei that herdeu thes thingis

seiden, And who may be maad saf '?

27 And he seide to hem, Tho thingis
that ben vnpossible anemptis men, ben
possible anemptis God.

28 Forsoth Petre seide, Loo! we han

thorowe a nedles eye, then for a ryche
man to enter into the kyngdom off God.
26 Then sayde they that herde that,

And who shall then be saved 1

27 He sayde, Thynges which are vn-
possible with men, are possible with
God.

28 Then Peter sayde, Loo ! we have

forsake alle thingis, and han sued thee.

forsaken all, and have folowed the.

29 Which seyde to hem, Treuly I seye
to 50U, no man is, that schal forsake
hous, ether fadir, ethir modir, ethir bri-
theren, ether wyf, ether sones, ether
feeldis, for the rewme of God,

30 And schal not receyue myche mo
thingis in this tyme, and in the world
to comynge euerelasting lyf.

31 Forsothe Jhesu took twelue disciplis,
and seide to hem, Lo ! we sti3en to Je-
rusalem, and alle thingis schulen be
endid, that ben writun by the prophetis
of mannis sone.

32 Forsoth he schal be bitrayed to
hethen men, and he schal be scorned,
and scourgid, and bispet

33 And aftir that thei ban scourgid,
thei schulen sle him, and the thridde
day he schal ryse a3ein.

34 And thei vnderstoden no thing of
these ; and this word was hid fro hem,
and thei vndirstoden not tho thingis
that weren seid.

35 Forsothe it was don, whanne Jhesu
cam ny3 to Jerico, sum blynd man saat
bisydis the weye beggynge.

36 And whanne he herde the cumpany
passynge, he axide, what this thing was.
seiden to him, that

37 Sothli thei

Jhesu of Nazareth passide.

38 And he cryedc, seyinge, Jhesu, the

sone of Duuith, haue mercy on me.
39 And thei that wenten bifore blam-
ydcn him, that he sdiulde ])e stille
Bothli ho cryede myclic more. Thou sone
of IJiiuith, haue mercy on me.

;

40 Forsothe Jhesu stondingc comaund-
idc liim to be })rou3t fortli to him. And
whanne he cam ny3, lie axide liiin,

41 Seyinge, What wolt thou I sclial do
to thee ? And he seide, Lord, that I se.

29 He sayde vnto them. Verily I saye
vnto you, there is noo man, that for-
saketh housse, other father, and mother,
other brethren, or wyfe, or children, for
the kyngdom off Goddes sake,

30 Which same shall

nott receave
moche moore in this worlde, and in the
worlde to come lyfe everlastynge.

31 He toke vnto hym the twelve, and.
sayde vnto them, Loo ! we go vp to
Jerusalem, and all shalbe fulfilled, that
are written be the prophettes off the
Sonne off man.

32 He shalbe delivered vnto the gen-
tyls, and shalbe mocked, and shalbe
despyitfully entreated, and shalbe spetten
on ;

33 And when they have scourged hym,
they will putt hym to deeth, and the
thyrde daye shall he aryse agayne.

34 They vnderstode none of these
thynges ; and this sayinge was hid from
them, and they perceaved
the
thynges which were spoken.

nott

35 Hit cam to passe, as they were come
neye vnto Jerico, a certayne blynde man
sate by the waye syde beggynge.

36 And when he herde the people

passe by, he axed, what it meant.

37 They sayd vnto hym, that Jesus off
Nazareth went by.

38 And he crycd, saynge, Jesus, tho

Sonne of David, have mercy on me.

39 And they which went before re-
Imckcd hym, be cause he sliulde liolde his
])eacc ; and he moclic the moare crycd.
The Sonne of David, have mercy on me.
40 Jesus stode styll and commaundcd
And
him to be brouglit vnto hym.
when he was come ncare, he Jixcd hym,
41 Sayinge, What wilt thou that I do
vnto tlic ? And lie sayde, Lordc, that I
mayc raccavc my sight.

2

190

;

2
1

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

42 Yah iesus qa|> du irnma, Ussaiwh ;

42 Da cw?e|) se Haelend, Beseoh ; clin

galaubeins j)cina ganasida j)uk.

geleafa de gchaelde.

43 Yah suns ussawh, yah laistida ina,
Yah alhi managei

awiliudonds Gu|)a.
gasaiwhandci, gaf liazcin Guj^a.

43 And he sona geseah, and him folg-
And call folc
ode, God wuldrigende.
Gode lof sealde, da hig daet gesawon.

Chap. XIX.

i Yah inngaleij^ands,

Chap. XIX.

i Da eodc he geond

))airlilaij) laireikoii.

2 Yah sai ! guina, namin haitans Zak-
kaius, sah was faurama|)leis motarye,
yah was gabigs,

3 Yah sokida gasaiwhan lesu, whas
Avesi, yah ni mahta, faura managein, unte
wahstau leitils was.

4 Yah bi|)ragyands faur, usstaig ana
smakkabagm, ei gasewhi 'ina ; unte is
and |)ata munaida |)airhgaggan.

5 Yah bi|)e qam ana })amma stada, in-
saiwhands iup Iesus, gasawh ina, yah
qaj? du imma, Zakkaiu, sniumyands dala|>
atsteig, himma daga auk in garda pein-
amraa skal ik wisan.

6 Yah sniumyands atstaig, yah andnam

Hiericho.

2 Da waes dar sum man, on naman

Zacheus,

se wses welig.

3 And he wolde gescon hwylc se Hael-
end wsere, da ne mihte he, for drere
msenegu, fordam de he waes lytel on
wsestmum.
4 Da am he beforan, and stah up on
an treow sicomorum, diet he hine ge-
sawe ; fordam de he wolde danon faran.
5 Da he com to dserc stowe, da gcscah
se Haelend hine, and cwaej) to hym, Za-
cheus, efst to dinum huse, fordam de ic
wylle to-da?g on dinum huse wunian.

6 Da efste be, and hine blidelice on-

ina faginonds.

feng.

7 Yah gasaiwhandans allai, birodide-
dun, qijjandans, patei du frawaurhtis
mans galai|> in gard ussalyan.

8 Standands j^an Zakkaius qaj? du Frau-
yin, Sai ! halbata aiginis meinis, Frauya,
gadailya unledaim ; yah yabai whis wha
afholoda, fidurfal|> fragilda.

7 Da hig d?et gesawon, da murcnodon
hig ealle, and cwaedon, Da?t he to syn-
fuUum men gecyrde.
8 Da stod Zacheus and cwcT|> to Drihtne,
Nu ! ic sylle ]jearfum healfe mine sehta ;
and gif ic jrnigne bereafodc, ic hit be
feowerfealdum agyfe.

9 Qa|> ]>an du inima Iesus, patei him-
ma daga naseins [^anuua garda war)>,
unte yali sa sunus Abrahamis ist

9 Da cw.TJ) se Haelend to him, To-da\g
disse hiw-raedcne ys lurl gcwordcn, for-
dam de he woes Abrahames beam ;

10 Qam auk sunus mans sokyan, yah

10 Mannes sunu com sccan, and hal

nasyan ))ans frahisanans.

don da't forwearj).

11 At gahausyandam |>an im jmta,
biaukands, qa|7 gayukon, bi |jatei nowlia
lairusak^m was, yali |»uhta im, ei suns
ekulda wesi })iudangardi
Gu))S gaswi-
kun|)yan.

1

Qaj) j)an, Manna sums godakunds
gaggida landis, franiman sis |)iudangard-
ya, yah gawandida sik.

1

Da hig dis gchyrdon, da ge-ichte
lie sum bigspell, fordam de he wa?s nch
Hicrusalem, and fordam de hig wendon,
hraidlice Godes rice geswutelod
daet

waere.^

1

Witodlice he cw8e)>. Sum jedel-boren
man ferde on fyrlcn land, da?t he him
rice onfenge, and eft agen come.

J 3 Athaitands jjan taihun

skalkans

13 Da clypodc he his tyn Jjcowas, and

1

;

XVIII. 42.-XIX. 13.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

397

42 And Jhesu seide to him, Biliold

thou ; thi feith hath maad thee saaf.
43 And a non he 575, and suede him,
magnyfiynge God. And al the peple, as
it sy3, 3af heriynge to God.

42 Jesus sayde vnto hym, Eeceave thy

sight ; thy faith hath saved the.
43 And immediatly he sawe, and folowed
hjTii, praysinge God. And all the peo-
ple, when they sawe it, gave laude to
God.

Chap. XIX.

i And Jhesu goynge

Chap. XIX. i And he entred in, and

yn, walkide thorw Jerico.

2 And lo ! a man, Zachee by name,
and he was prince of pupplicans, and he
was riche.

3 And he sou^te to see Jhesu, who he
was, and he my3te not, for the cumpany,
for he was litel in stature.

4 And he rennynge bifore, sti5ede in
to a sycamoure tree, that he schulde see
Jhesu ; for he was to passinge thenuis.
5 And Jhesu biholdinge v|:)ward, whanne
he cam to the place, sy^ him, and seyde
to him, Zachee, hastinge cum doun, for
to day I moot dwelle in thin hous.

6 And he hastinge cam doun, and ioy-

inge reseyuede him.

7 And whanne alle men sayen, thei
grucchiden, seyinge, For he hadde turned
to a synful man,

8 Forsoth Zachee stondinge seide to
the Lord, Lo ! Lord, I 3yue the half of
my goodis to pore men ; and if I haue
ony thing defraudid ony man, I 3eide
the fourefold.

9 Jhesu seide to him, For in this day
heelthe is maad to this hous, for and he
is the sone of Abraham ;

1

10 Forsothe mannis sone cam to scke,
and make saaf this thing that perischede.
Hem heringc thcs thingis, he putt-
ingc to, seide a paraljlc, for he was ny3
Jerusalem, and for tlioi gessidcn, that
the kyngdom of God schulde be schcwid
a non.

I 2 Thcrforc he seide, Sum no])le man
wentc in to a for cuntree, to take to him
a kyngdom, and to turne a3('yn.

13 Sothli his ten scruauutis clepid, lie

went thorowe Jerico.

2 And beholde !

there was a man,
named Zacheus, and he was a rueler
amonge the publicans, and ryche alsoo.

3 And he made meanes to se Jesus,
what he shulde be, and he coulde nott,
for the preace, be cause he was off a
lowe stature,

4 And he ran before, and ascended
vppe into a sicomore tree, to se hym
for he wolde come that same waye.

5 And when Jesus cam to the place,
he loked vp, and sawe him, and sayd
vnto hym, Zache, attonce come doune,
for to daye I muste a byde at thy
housse.

6 And hastely he cam doune, and re-

ceaved hym ioyfully.

7 And when they sawe that, they all
groudged, sayinge. He is gone into tary
with a man that is a synner.

8 Zache stode forthe and sayde vnto
the Lorde, Beholde ! Lorde, the haulfe
of my gooddes I geve to the povre ; and
if I have done eny man wronge, I wyll
restoore hym fower folde.

9 Jesus sayd vnto hym, This daye is
healthe come vnto this housse, for as-
moche as it also is become the childe
off Abraham ;

10 For the sonne off man is come to
seke, and to save that which was looste.
11 As they hcrd(^ these thynges, he
added thcrto a similitude, be cause ho
was neye to Jerusalem, and be cause
also they thought, that the kyngdom of
God shulde shortely apere.
12 He sayde therfore, A certayne noble
man went into a farre countre, to re-
ceavc a kyngdom, and then to como
agayno.

\^ lie called his ten scrvauntcs, and

9

:u)8

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

seinans, atgaf 'im tailmii dailos.
qa|> du im, Kaupojj, iiiite ik qiiiiau.

Yah

14 1|> baurgyaiis is tiyaidedun ina, yah
insandidedun aim afar iinina, qi|)an hins,
Ni wilcima jniiia })iudauoii uiar uusis.

15 Yah war]), bij^e atwandida sik, aftra
andiiiiuaiids |)iudangardya ; yah baihait
•wopyan du sis
j>an3 skalkans, }>aimei
afgaf jnita silubr, ei f^akuuuaidedi, wha
wharyizuh gawaurhtedi.

sealde tyn pund him.
him, Ceapia}), od dtt't ic cume.

And cwiljj to

14 Da liatedon bine his leode, and
sefter him, and
sendon
cwicdon, We nyllaj>, dait dcs ricsie ofer
us.

crrend-racan

15 Da he agen com, and di«t rice on-
feng ; he bet clypian his [jeowas, de he
diet feoh sealde, dajt he wiste, hii niycel
gehwilc gemangode.

16 Qam ]>an

sa

qijjands,
Fniuya, skatts jjeiDS gawaurhta taihuii
skattans.

frumista,

17 Yah qa|j du imma, Waila, goda
skalk ; unto in leitnamma wast triggws,
ufar taihuu
siyais
baurgim.

waldufni

habaiids

18 Yah qam an]?ar, qi|>ands, Frauya,

skatts j)eiiis gawaurhta hmf skattans.

Qa|> ]?an yah du j^amma, Yah J)U

1

16 Da com se forma, and cwrej>, Hlaf-

ord, din piind gestrynde tyn piind.

17 Da cwae}) se hlaford, Geblissa, du
goda |>eowa ; fordam de dii wacre on
lytlum getrywe, dii byst auweald ha:lj-
bende ofer tyn ceastra.

18 Da com oder, and cwfe}), Hlaford,

din pund gestrynde fif pund.

19 Da cwsej) he to dam, And beo du

siyais ularo finif baurgim.

ofer fif ceastra.

20 Yah sums qam, qi|jands, Frauya,
sai ! sa skatts }?eins, jjanei habaida, ga-
hijxida ilia 'in fanin.

21 Ohta mis auk ])uk, unte manna
hardus is ; nimis jjatei ui lagides, yah
sneijns |;atei ni saisost.

20 Da com oder, and cwa}}>, Hlaford,
ha^fde, on

her ys din piind, de ic
swat-lin aled.

21

Ic de adred, fordam de du eart
st1|) man ; dii nimst diet dii ne settest,
and du ripst dajt dii ne seowe.

22 Yah qa]? du imma, Us mun|)a
|)einamma stoya |)uk, unselya skalk, yali
Wisscis, |'atci ik manna hardus
lata.
im, ni mauds }jatei ni lagida, yah sneij)-
auds {)atci ni saiso ?

22 Da cwse]) he to him. Of dinum
muj)e ic de deme, la ly|ira Jioowa.
Dii
wistest, dait ic eom sti|> man, da?t ic
nime daet ic ne sette, and ripe
divt
ic ne seow ?

23 Yah duwhc ni atlagidos j^ata silubr
mcin du skattyam, yah qimauds mij)
wokra galausidcdyau jiata 1

23 And hwi ne sealdcst dii min feoh
hit

hire, and donne ic come, ic

to
witodlice mid gcstreoue onfenge 1

24 Yah du |niim

faurastandandam
qal?, Nimij) af imma j)ana skatt, yah
gibij) })anima j)OS taihuu dailos liaband-

24 Da cwre|) he to dam de him jibutan
stodon, Nima|) da^t pilnd fram him, and
syllaj) dam de ha'fj) tyn pund.

in.

25 Yah qo)mn du imma, Frauya, lia-

25 Da cwjcdon big to him, Hlaford,

baij> taihuu dailos.

he lhTf|> tyn piind.

26 Qi|ni allis izwis, |>atei wharyammcli
i|) af |)amma unhab-
habaij), afuimada af

habandane gibada ;
nndin, yah |>atei
imma.

26 S6|)lice ic secge eow, dset aelcum
ha^bbendiim bij) geseald ; fram dam de
na^fji, ge da;t doet he hxf\>, him by])
iifyrred.

4
7

1

XIX. 14-26.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

399

5af to hem ten besauntis. And he seide
to hem, Marchaundise ^e, til I come.

14 Forsoth his citeseyns hatiden him,
and sente a messager aftir him, seyinge,

_ We nyle, that he regne on vs.

delivered them ten pounde.
vnto them. By and sell, till I come.

Sayinge

1

But his citesens hated hym, and sent
messengers after hym, saynge. We will
not have this man to raigne over vs.

15 And it was don, that the rewme
takun, he turnede a^en ; and he com-
aundide his seruauntis to be clepid, to
whiche he 5af money, that he schulde
wite, hou moche ech hadde wunne by
chafFaring.

T 6 Forsoth the firste cam,seyinge, Lord,

15 And it cam to passe, when he was
come agayne, and had receaved his
kyngdom, he commaunded his
ser-
vauntes to be called to hym, to whom he
gave his money, to witt, what every
man had done.

16 Then cam the fyrst, sayinge, Lorde,

thi besaunt hath wunne ten besauntis.

thy pounde hath encreased ten pounde.

17 He seide to him, Wei be, thou
goode seruaunt ; for in litil thing thou
hast be trewe, thou schalt haue power
on ten citees.

18 And another cam, seyinge, Lord,

thi besaunt hath maad fyue besauntis.

19 And he seide to this, And be thou

on fyue citees.

20 And the thridde cam, seyinge, Lord,
lo ! thi besaunt, which I hadde, kept in
a sudarie.^

21 Forsoth I dredde thee, for thou art
an austerne man ; thou takist awey this
thing which thou settist not, and thou
repist this thing which thou hast not
sowe.

2 2 He seith to him, Weyward seruaunt,
of thi mouth I deme thee. Wistist thou,
that I am an hausterne man, takinge
a wey this thing which I settide not,
and repinge this thing which I haue not
Bowe 1

23 And whi ha.'^t thou not ^ouun my
money to the boord, and I comynge
Bchulde haue receyued it sothli with
vsuris ?

24 And he seide to hem that stooden
ny^. Take 5c awey fro him the l)csaunt,
and 3yue 30 to him that huth ten bc-
Bauntis.

1

And he sayde vnto hym. Well, goode
servaunte ; be cause thou wast faithfuU
in a very lytell tbynge, take thou aucto-
rite over ten cities.

18 And the other cam, sayinge, Lorde,
thy pounde hath encreased fyve pounde.
19 And to the same he sayde, And be

thou alsoo rueler over fyve cities.

20 And the thirde cam, and sayde,
Lorde, beholde ! here thy pounde, which
I have, kepte in a napkyn.

2

For I feared the, be cause thou arte
a strayte man ; thou takest vp that thou
laydest nott doune, and repest that thou
diddest nott sowe.

22 And he sayde vnto hym, Of thyne
awne mougthe iudge I the, thou evyll
Kncwest thou, that I am a
servaunt.
strayte man, takynge vppe that I layde
not doune, and repinge that I did not
so\w %

23 Wherfore then gavest not thou my
money into the banke, and then at my
commyng shulde I have rc(iuired myne
awne with vauntage ?

24 And he sayde to them that stode
by. Take from hym that pounde, and
geve it hym that hathe ten pounde.

25 And the! soidcn to him. Lord, he

25 And they sayd to hym, Lorde, he

hatli ten besauntis.

Iiath ten pounde.

26 Sothli I seie to 50U, for to ech
hauyngc it schal ])e ^ouun, and he fl(;liul
be picntcuous ; but fro him that hatli
not, also this thing that he hath, schal
be takun of him.

26 I saye vnto you, that vnto all them
that have it shalbe gevcn ; and from
hyine tliat hath not, even that he hath,
shalbe taken awaye.

400

GOTHIC, 360.

27

Aj))nin

swc|)anh

fiyands meinans
yaiiums, J?aiei iii wildedun iiiik })iu(laiioM
ufar sis, briggi]? her, yah us(iiiiiijj faura
mis.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Li ke

27 Deah hwajdere da mme fynd, de
noldon dait ic ofcr hig ricsudc, laJdaj^
hider, and ofsleaj? hig beforan me.

28 Yah qi|)aTids ))ata, iddya fram, us-

28 And dysuni gecwedenum, he ferde

gaggands iu lairusaulwma.

to Hierusalem.^

29 Yah \var|i,

bij^e newha was Bc))-
sfagein yah Bcjjaniyin, af fairgunya, J>atei
haitada Alcwyo, insandida twans siponye
seinaize,

in

30 Qi)?ands, Gaggats in J>o wi))rawair))-
on haim ;
|)izaiei inngaggandans
bigitats fulan asilaus gabundanaiia, ana
Jjammei ni ainshun aiw manne sat ;
andbindandans ina, attiuhi|>.

29 Da he genealaehte Bethfage and
Bethania, to dam munte, de is genenmcd
Oliueti, he sende his twegen cnihtas,

30 And cwae)?, Fara)? on dajt castel,

de ongen inc ys ; on dam
getiged, on
gyt gemeta|> assan folan
dam nan man gyt ne sset; untigajj hyne,
and laedajj to me.

31 Yah yabai whas i'nqis

fraihnai,
duwhe andbindi[>, swa qijmits du imma,
patei Frauya |)is gairnei}?.

32 Galeij^audans j^an Jjai insandidans,

bigctun swaswe qa]) du im, ....

33 Andbindandam J^an I'm, qcjmn ]?ai
frauyans l)is du 'im, Duwhe audbiudats
Jiana fulan 1

34 1\> eis qe])un, Frauyin jjaurfts ]>is

ist.

35 Yah attaulmn J)ana fuhin lesua ;
yah uswairpandaus wastyos seinos, ana
|)ana fulan ussatidedun lesu.

36 Gaggandin |)au 'imma, ufstrawi-

dedun wastyom seinaim ana wiga.

37 Bijjc jnxn is newha was yuj)an at
'ibdalyiu }>is fairgunyis Alewabagnie, du-
gunnun alakyo managci siponye foginon-
daiis hazyan Giijj
mikikii in
allaizo, j)oze scwhun, mahte,

stibnai

])iu))ida

38 Qi|)andans,

sa qimanda
|>iu(lans in naniin Frauyins ; gawair[)i
in hiinina, yah wul})us in hauhistyam.
39 Yah suniai Farcisaic us |>izai man-
agein qc})un du imma, Laisari, sak |)aim
si})()nyam jicinaim.

40 Yah andhafyands qaj> du iin, QiJ^a
I'atci yabai j)ai slawand, staiuos

izwis,

hroj)yand.

31 And gif inc hwji ilcsajj, hwi gyt
hine uutigaj), secga)? him, Drihten ha.f[)
his neode.

32 Da ferdon da de asende Wcrron,
and fundon swa he him saede, done
folan standan.

33 Da hig hine untigdon, da cwa?don
da hlafordas, II wi uutige ge done folan (

34 Da cwtpdon hig, Fordam de Drihten

hvef\> his neode.

35 Da Iseddon hig hyne to dam Kx\-
ende ; and hyra rcaf wurpon ofcr done
folan, and done HiClend on-ufan setton.
36 And da he for, hi strehton under

hine hyra reaf on dam wcge.
37 And da he genealoehto to Oliuctcs
miintcs nyder-stige, da ongunnon calle
da maiuigeo geblissian, and mid mycelre
stefne God hercdon be callum dam
mihtum, de hig gesiiwon,

38 And cwirdon, Gebletsod sy se cyning,
de com on Drihtnes naman ; syb sy on
heofenum, and wuldor on heahnessum.

39 Da cwsedon sume of dam Fariscum
to him, Larcow, cid dinum Icorning-
cnihtum.

40 Da cw«t|) he to him, Ic cow secge,

dcah das suwion, stanas clypiaj?.'''

41 Yah sunsei newha was, gasaiwhands

41 And da he genealaehte, and gcseaU

)>o baurg, gaigrot bi |>o,

42 Qi|)ands, j^atei i() wisscdcis, yah ]m,
in Jmnima daga })cinaimna, |'0 du gn-

da ceastre, he wcop ofcr liig,

42 And cwa^j), Eahi gif dii wistcst, and
witodlice on dysum dinum dsege, de de

;

1

;

XIX. 27-42.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

401

27 Netheles brynge ^e hidir tlio myne
enemy es, that nolde me to regne on
hem, and sle 3e bifore me.

28 And tbes tbingis seyd, be wente

bifore, sti3ynge to Jerusalem.

29 And it was don, wbanne be cam
ny3 to Betbfage and Betanye, at tbe
mount, wbicb is clepid of Olyuete, be
sente bis tweye disciplis,

30 Seyinge, Go 3e in to tbe castel,
wbicb is a^ens 30U ; in to wbicb 36
entrynge scbulen fynde a colt of a slie
asse, on wbicb non of men euere saat
vnbynde 3e bim, and brynge 3e to me.

31 And if ony man scbal axe, wbi 3e
vnbynden, tbus 3e scbulen seye to bim,
For tbe Lord desyi'itb bis work.

32 Forsotbe tbei

tbat weren sent,
wenten fortb, and founden as be seyde
to bem, a colt stondinge.
33 Sotbli bem vntyynge tbe colt, tbe
lordis of bim seyde to bem, Wbat vntyen
36 tbe colt 1

34 And tbei seiden, For tbe Lord batb

bim nedful.

27 Morover thoose myne enemys, which
wolde not tbat I sbulde raigne over
them, brynge bidder, and slee them be-
fore me.

28 And when he badd tbous spoken,
he proceded forthe before them, and
went vppe to Jerusalem.

29 And it fortuned, when be was come
noye to Betbfage and Bethany, besydes
mounte Olivete, be sent two of bis dis-
ciples,

30 Sayinge, Goo ye into the toune,
wbicb is over against you ; in the wbicb
as Sonne as ye are come ye shall fynde
coolte tyed, wher on yett never
a
man sate ; loose hym, and brynge hym
bidder.

3

And if eny man axe you, why tbat
ye loose hym, tbus saye vnto hym, The
Lorde bathe nede of hym.

32 They that wer sent, went their
waye, and founde even as be bad sayde
vnto them, ....

33 And as they were aloosynge the
coolte, tbe owners sayde vnto them.
Why loose ye tbe coolte ?

34 And they sayde, For tbe Lorde

bath nede of hym.

35 And tbei ledden bim to Jbesu ; and
tbei, castinge ber clotbis on tbe colt,
puttedyn Jbesu on Idm.

35 And they brought hym to Jesus
their rayment on the
and they cast
coolte, and sett Jesus theron.

36 Forsotbe bim goynge, tbei vndir

36 As he went, they spredde their

strewiden ber clotbis in tbe weye.
37 And wbanne now be cam ny3 to
tbe comynge doun of tbe bil of Olyuete,
alle tbe cumpanyes of men comynge
d<jun bigunnen ioyinge to berie God
witb greet vois on alle
tbe vertues,
wbicbc tbei 8y3en,

38 Seyinge, Blessid is tbe kyng, tbat
cometli in the name of the Lord ; pees
in beucne, and glorie in lii3 tbingis.

39 And summe of tbe Pharisees of
the cumj)anye8 seydcn to bim, Maister,
blame thi disciplis.

40 To wbicbc he seide, I seye to 30U,
tlics schulen be stillc, stoones

for if
scbulen crj'O.

41 And wbanne he nei3cde, he scyngc

the citce, wcptc on it,

42 Seyinge, For if tljoiviiaddiHt knowc,
and thou, and sotheli in this thi day.

clootbes in the waye.
37 When he was come wheare be
sbulde goo doune from the mounte Oli-
vete, tbe whole multitude of his disci-
ples began to reioyce and to lawde God
with a loude voyce for all the miracles,
that they had sene,

38 Sayinge, Blessed be the kyngc, that
commeth in the name off the Lorde ;
peace in hcven, and glory in the bycst.

39 And some off tbe Pharises off the
company sayde vnto him, Master, re-
buke thy disciples.

40 lie answered and sayde vnto them,
I tell you, yff these holde their peace,
the stones will cryc.

41 And when he was come noare, ho

behelde the citic, and we])t on hit,

42 Sayinge, Yff thou luKhh'Ht knowen
thooBC tliyngcM, whych bcloiigc vntt) tiiy

I) (I

;

;

402

GOTHIC, 36o.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

"vvairj^ya })einaniina ;
faura augam peinaim.

ij) nu gafulgiii ist

43 patei qimand dagos ana |>us, yah
bigraband fiyands
[)uk,
yah bistaudaud Jnik, yah biwaibyaud
J)uk aUaJjro ;

|)einai grabai

to sybbe s}nul ; mi hig synd fram dinum
cagum behydde.

43 Fordam de da dagas to de cuma|>,
and dine fynd de betrymia)), and behab-
bajj de, and genyrwaj) de aeghwanon ;

44 Yah airjjai

))uk gaibnyand, yah
barna }>cina in j)us ; yah ni Ictand in
))us stain ana staina, in jjizei ni ufkun})-
es jiata mcl niuliseinais ))eiuaizos.

44 And to eor|mn afyllaj) de, and dine
beam de on de synd ; and hig ne la5fa}>
on de Stan ofer stane, fordam de dii ne
oucueowe da tide dinre geneosunge.

45 Yah galeipands "in alh, dugann us-
wairpan |)ans frabugyandans in izai yah
bugyandans,

46 QiJ>ands du 'im, Gamelij? 'ist, patei
ij> yus ina

gards meins gards bido "ist,
gatawidedu)? du filegrya j)iube.
47 Yah was laisyands daga whammeh
))ai auhniistans gud-
'in
yans, yah bokaryos sokidedun ina us-
qistyau, yah j>ai frumistans manageins

|?izai alh.

Ij)

48 Yah ni bigctun wha gatawidedeina,
managci auk alakyo hahaida, du hausyan
inima.

Chap. XX.

i Yah war)? in sumam-
ma dage yainaize, at hiisyandin imma
j)0 nianagcin in alh, yah wailameryandin,
atsto|)un j'ai gudyans yah bokaryos m\\>
jjaini sinistani ;

2 Yah qel>un du inima, qi)»andans,
Qij) unsis, in whanima Avaldufnye })ata
tauyis, ai|'|'au whas ist
saei gaf )ms
]nitii Nvaldui'iii ?

3 Andliafyands j'an qaj) du Vm, Fraihna
izwis yah ik ainis waurdis ; yah qi)'i[>
mis.

4 Daupcins lohauuis uzuh hiniina was,

|)au uzuh mannam ?

5 1|) cis l^ahtcdun mij) sis misso, (ji))-
aiidans, patei yabai (pj'am, Us hiniina,
qi|)i}) a|)j)an, Duwhe ni gahiubidcdu)> im-
ma ?

6 1|) yabai qijiam, Us mannam, alia
so managci stainam afwairpij) unsis ;
triggwaba galaubyand auk allai,
lo-
liannon praufttu wisan.

45 Da ongan he of dam temple utr
drifan da syllendan and da bicgendan,

46 And him to cwae|>, Hit ys a^\Titen,
Dcet min hus ys gebed-hiis, ge hit
woi'htou to sceajjena scra^fe.
47 And he waes daegliwamlice on dam
Sujjlice dara sacerda
temple laercnde.
ealdras, and da boceras, and d<TS folccs
ealdor-men smeadon hii hig hine fordou
mihton ;

48 And hig ne fundon hwa?t hi him to
gylte dydon, s6|)lice call folc wajs abysgod,
de be him gehyrde secgan.

Chap. XX.

1 Da wies anum da^ge
gcwordcn, da he daH folc on dam temple
Iscrde, and him bodude, da comou da^'a
sacerda ealdras and da boceras

2 And to him cw?edon, Scgo us, on
hwylcum anwalde wyrcst dii d;is )>ing,
odde hwaet ys se de disne auweald
scaldc 1

3 Da cwrej) he him to andsware. And
ic acsige eow an word ; audswariaj) me.

4 Wa^s lohanncs fulluht of heofonc,

hwa^der de of mannum 1

5 Dii I'ohtou hig bctwcox liim, and
cwa'don, Gyf we secgaj>, Da't he sy of
licofone, he cwyj) to us, Hwi ne gelyfde
ge him 1

6 Gyf we secga|>, Da^t lie sy of man-
num, call folc us haMi}>; hi wiston geare,
da^t lohanncs wa?8 witega.

7

^'ah

andlioiun,

ci

ni

wisscdcina

7 Da andswaredon liig, d»t hig nyston,

wiia])ro.

h wan on he wa?s.

;

;

;

;

;

XIX. 43--XX. 7.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

403

winch is to pees to thee ; but now thei
ben hid fro thin y^en.

43 For daies schulen come into thee,
and thin enemyes schulen enuyroune
thee with pale, and schulen enuyroune
thee, and thei schulen make thee streyt
on alle sydis ;
44 And thei schulen caste thee doun
to erthe, and thi sones that ben in thee;
and thei schulen not leeue in thee a
stoon on a stoon, for thou hast not
knowe the tyme of thi visitacioun.
45 And he gon in to the temple, bigan
to caste out men sellinge ther ynne and
biggynge,

46 Seyinge to hem, It is writun. For
myn hous is an hous of preier, forsothe
5e han maad it a den of theuys.

47 And he was techinge euery day
Forsoth the princes of
in the temple.
prestis, and scribis, and the princis of
the peple sou3ten to leese him

peace, even att thys daye ; but nowe
are they hidde from thyne eyes.

43 For the dayes shall come apon the,
and thyne enemys shall compas the
about wyth a banke, and shall besege
the rounde aboute, and kepe the in on
every syde

44 And make the even wyth the
grounde, wyth thy chyldren whych are
in the ; and they shall nott leve in the
one stone apon another, because thou
knewest nott the tyme off thy visitacion.
45 And he went into the temple, and
began to cast out them that solde therin
and them that bought,

46 Sayinge vnto them, Hyt is written,
My housse is the housse off prayer,
butt ye have made it a den off theves.
47 And he taught dayly in the temple.
The hye prestes, and the scrybes; and
the chefe off the people went about to
destroye hym

48 And thei founden not what thei
schulden do to him, for al the peple
was al ocupyed, heeringe him.

48 Butt coulde nott fynde what to do,
for all the people stack e by hym, and
gave him audience.

Chap. XX.

i And it was don in
oon of dayes, him techinge the peple
in the temple, and prcchinge the gospel,
tlie princis of prestis and the scribis
camen to giderc >vith the eldre men ;

2 And seiden, seyinge to him, Seye
to vs, in what power thou dost this
thing, ether who 5af to thee this power?

3 Forsothe Jhe.su answeringc scide to

liem, And I schal axe 30U a word
answere ^e to me.

4 Was the baptym of Joon of heuene,

ether of men ?

5 And thei thou3tcn witli ynne liem
BC'luc, seyinge, For if we schulen seye.
Of heuene, lie schal seye. Win therfore
bileuen yi not to liim ?

6 Forsoth if we sclmlen sfye, Of men,
all the comyn j)fplc schal stooiic vs ;
for thei ben certcyn, that John i.s a
pro])hctc.

Chap. XX.

i And yt fortuned in
one off those dayes, as he taught the
people in the temple, and preached the
gospcll, the hye prestes and the scrybes
cam vnto hym wyth the seniours

2 And spake vnto hym, sayinge. Tell
vs, by what auctorite thou doest these
thynges, other who is he that gave the
thys auctorite 1

3 He answered and sayde vnto them,
I also will axe you a question ; and
answer me.

4 Was the baptem of Jhon from hcvcn,

or of men 1

5 They thought wyth in them selves,
sayinge, Yff we shall sayc. From hcvcn,
he will sayc. Why then belevcd ye hym
noti

6 r>ut and yff wo shall sayc. Of men,
all the ])0()plo will stone vs ; for they
Buerly belevcd, that .Ilion was a pro-
phet t.

7 And thei answcriden, thiit thei witcn

7 And they answered, that they coulde

not, of whcnnis it was.

nott tell, whence it was.

1) (1 2

9
1

9
1

404

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXOX, 995.

[St. Luke

8 Yali Icsiis qa}j 'ini, Ni ik I'zwis qij^a,

'ill wliamma waldufiiyc J)ata tauya.

9 Dugann |)an du managein qij)an ]>o
Manna ussatida weiiiagard,
gayukon.
yah anafalli iua waurstwyam ; yah aHaij?
yera ganoha.

10 Yah in mela, insandida du ))aim
aurtyam skalk, ei akranis ))is weina-
gardis gebcina imma ;
})ai aurtyans
usbliggwandans ina, iusaudideduu laus-
ana.

'i]>

1

Yah anaaiauk

sandyan anj^arana
i|) eis yah yainana bliggwaiidans,
skalk ;
yah unsweraiidans, insandidedun lausaua.

8 Da cw.'t')? se Haelend him to, Ne ic
cow ne secge, on hwylcum auwalde ic
das })ing wyrce.

9 He ongan da dis bigspel to dam
folce cwedan. Sum man plantode him
win-geard, and hine gesette mid tilium ;
and he waes him feor manegum tidum.

10 Da on tide, lie sende hys j>eow to
dam tihum, da^t hig him seaUlon of
da,'S win-<^eardes wajstme ; da swunj^on
hig done, and idelne hine forleton.

1

Da sende he oderne j^eow ; da beot-
on hig done, and mid teonum gewaec-
ende, hine forleton idelne.

12 Yah anaaiauk sandyan |>ridyan, \\>
eis yah J)ana gawondondans, uswaurpun.

12 Da sende he )>riddan, da \\'Ui-pon

hig ut done gewundodue.

13 Qa|> })an sa frauya ]>\s wcinagardls,
Wha taiiyau 1
Santlya sunu ineinana
))ana liuban ; aufto Jjana gasaiwhandans^
aistand.

13 Da cw8e}j dses win-geardes hlaford,
Hwivt do ic ]
Ic asende minne hofaii
sunu ; wenunga hine hig forwandia)>,
donne hig hine geseoj).

14 Gasaiwhandans jjan

jjai aurt-
yans, jjalitcdun mijj sis niisso, qi|)andans,
Sa ist sa arbinumya, afslaliam ina, ci
uns wair})ai |)ata arbi.

"ina

15 Yah uswairpandans ina ut us ))am-
Wha nu

ma weinagarda, usqemun.
tauyai im frauya J)is weinagardis ?

t6 Qimi|), yah usqistci|) aurtyam |iaim,
anj^araini.

yah gibijj
Gahausyandaiis, qc)mn Jau, Nis-siyai.

|'ana wcinagard

17 lj> is insaiwhands du im, qa}), A})|'an
wha ist |>ata gamelido, Stains |)ammei
uskusun timryaiis, sah warjj du haubida
waihstins 1

14 Da hine da tilian gesawon, hig
jiohton betweox him, and cwacdon, Her
ys se yrfe-weard, cumaj), uton hine of-
slean, da3t seo ivht lire sy.

15 And hig hine of dam win-gearde
Hwaet de|) da3S

awurpon, ofslegene.
wiiiiTcardcs hlaford ?

16 Pie cym|i, and fors])il|) da tilian,
Hig
and sylj) done win-geard odrum.
cwjrdon, da hig dis gehyrdon, Daet ne
freweorde.
o

17 Da beheold he hig, and cwiv)>, Hwjet
is da^t awriten is, Done stan de da
wyrhtan awurpon, des is geworden on
diere hyrnan hcafod ?

18 Whazuli saci driusij) ana jjana stain,
gakrotuda ; i|) ana |'anci driusi|>, diswin))-
eij) ina.

18 -^71c dc fyl}' ofer done stan, by|>
ofer done de he fyl)>, he to-

forbryt ;
cwyst.

1

Yah sokidednn j^ai bokaryos, yah
nuhnmistans giidyans, uslagyan ana ina
lianduns in j>izai wheihii, yah ohtcdun
)»o manat^cin ; frojmn auk j'atei du ini
]h) gayukon (ja|).

20 Yah aHeibandans insandidcduu fcr-

1

Da sohton daM'a siicorda ealdras,
and da boeeras, hyra handa on da^re
tide on hine wurpan, and hig adreilon
him d;vt folc ;
s6|>lice hi ongeton dast
he dis bigspcll to him cwa^ji.

20 Da scudon hig mid scarwum, da de

2

5
2
1

XX. 8-20.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

405

8 And Jhesu seide to hem, Neither I
seie to 50U, in what power I do thes
thingis.

9 Forsothe he bigan to seye to the
comyn peple this parable. Sum man
plantide a vyner, and settide it to ferme
to tilieris ; and he was in pilgrymage
many tymes.

10 And in the tyme of gedrynge of
grapis, he sente a seruaunt to the tilieris,
that thei schulden 3yue to him of the
fruyt of the vyner ; whiche leften him,
betun, voyde.

11 And he addide to sende another
betinge
seruaunt ;
this, and ponyschynge with dispisingis,
leften voyde.

forsothe also thei

1

And he addide to sende the thridde,
whiche also woundinge him, castiden
out.

13 Sothli the lord of the vyner seide,
I schal sende my
What schal I do ?
dereworthe sone ; perauenture whanne
thei schulen se him, thei schulen be
aschamyd.

14 Whom whanne the tilieris hadden
seyn, thei thou3ten with ynne hem selue,
seyinge. This is the eyr, sle we him,
that the eritage be maad oure.

15 And thei killiden him, cast out of
the vyner. What therfore schal the lord
of the vyner do to hem 1

16 He schal come, and lesc these til-
ieris, and he schal 3yue the vyner to
Which thing herd, thei seiden
othere.
to him, Fer be it.

17 Forsothe he biholdingc hem, seide.
What tl.erfore
is
writun. The stoon whom men bildinge
rcproucdcn, this is maud in to the heed
of the corner ]

is this thing that

18 Ech that schal fallc on that stoon,
Bchal be brysid ; forsothe on whom it
it schal brcke him in to
Bchal falle,
Bmale parties.

19 And the princes of j)rcstis, and the
scribis, 80U3tcn to settc hondis on him
in that our, and thei droddcn the peple ;
forsothe thei kncwcn that to hem he
seide this lykncssc.

20 And thei aspyinge scntcn aspicris,

8 And Jesus sayde vnto them, Nether
tell I you, by what auctorite I do these
thynges.

9 Then began he to put forthe to the
people this similitude. A certayne man
planted a vyneyarde, and lett it forthe
to fermers ; and went hym silfe into a
straunge countre for a greate season.

10 And when the time cam, he sent
a servaunt to his tennauntes, that they
shulde geve hym of the frutes of the
vyneyarde ; the tennauntes bett hym,
and sent hym awaye empty.

1

And he ceased nott therby but sent
yett another servaunt ; and they bett
hym, and foule entreated hym alsoo,
and sent hym aAvaye empty.

1

Morover he sent the thyrde alsoo,
and hym they wounded, and cast hym
out.

13 Then sayde the lorde off the vyne-
yarde. What shall I do 1
I wyll sende
my deare sonne j hym per adventure
they wyll reverence, when they se hym.

14 When the fermers sawe hym, they
thought in them selves, sayinge, This is
the heyre, come, lett vs kyll hym, that
the enherytaunce maye be oures,

1

And they cast hym out of the vyne-
yarde, and kylled hym. Nawe what
shall the lorde off the vyneyarde do vnto
them]

16 He wyll come, and destroye those
fermers, and will lett out his vyneyarde
to other. When they herde that, they
sayde, God forbid.

17 He behelde them, and sayd, What
meaneth thys then that is written. The
stone that the bylders refused, is made
the heed corner stone ?

18 Whosoever stoniblc at that stone,
shalbc brused ; but on whomsoever it
faul, it wyll alto breakc hym.

19 And the hyc prcstcs, and the scrybcs,
the same howrc went about to laye
hondcs on liini, but they feared the j)eo-
for they perccavcd that he had
ple ;
spoken this similitude agaynst thcni.

20 And they watched liim and sent

406

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

;

;

yans, j^nns us 1 lutein taikny.aiulans sik
f^araihtans
is
Avaurdei, yah atgobeiua iua reikya, yah
Avakhifnya kiiidinis.

gafaifalicina

wisan,

ei

2 1 Yali frchun ina, qi|7andans, Laisari,
witum, |)atei raihtaba rodeis, yah Uiiseis ;
yah ni andsaiwliis andwairj?i, ak bi sun-
yai wig Cu|)S laiseis.

22 Skuldu 1st unsis Kaisara giki giban,

))au 11 iu 'I

hi rihtwise leton, da^t hifj hine gescyld-
egodon, and djet hig liine geseaUlon
dam eaklron to dome, and to dses deman
anwalde to fordemanne.

21 Da acsodon hig hine, and cwaedon,
Lfireow, we witon, daet dii rihte sprycst
and for nanum men ne
and Iscrst ;
wandast, ac Godes wcg on s6|)fivstnesse
leerst.

22 Is hit riht daet man dam Casere

gafol syllc, de na 1

23 Bisaiwhands |)an "ize unselein, lesus

qaj) du im, Wha mik fraisi]> 1

23 Da cwa^j) he to him, da he hyra

facen onget, H>vi fandige ge mini

24 Ataugcijj mis skatt ; whis habai[>
manlcikan yah ufarmeli ? Aiidhafyaud-
aiis |)an ([e))un, Kaisaris.

25 1)) is qajjuh du 'im, us uu gibij) \>o

Kaisaris Kaisara, yah ])o Gu];s, Guj^a.

24 Y'waj) me anne penig ; hwnes anlic-
nesse h3ef[) he and ofer-gewrit ] Da
cwaedon hig, Dres Caseres.

25 Da cw3ej> he to him, A'g}'fa|) dam
Casere da ]>mg de daes Caseres synd,
and Gode, da })ing de Godes synd.

26 Yah ni mahtedun gafahan "is waurde
in andwair)>ya manageius ; yah siUlaleik-
yandans andawaurdc is, ga|;ahaidedun.

26 Da ne mihton hig his word befon
beforan dam folce ; da suwedon hig
O'
wundrigcudc be his andsware.''"

27 Duatgaggandans J)an suniai Sad-
(|i})and usstass ni wisan,

dukaie, juiiei

freliun 'ina,

28 Qi})audans, Laisari, Moses gamelida
uns, yabai wliis bro|)ar gadau|)nai aig-
ands qcn, yah sa unbarnahs gadau))nai,
ei niniai brojjar is \>o qen, yah urraisyai
fraiw brojjr seinamma.

27 Da genealcchton sume of Saduceum,
da »tsacaj) da^s acrystes, and acsodon
hine,

28 And cwsedon, Lareow, Moyses us
vrvCit, gif hwaes bn'dor ])y|i dead and wif
haibbe, and se by}) biitan bearnuni, da>t
his brodor ninie his wif, and hys brodor
seed awecce.

29 Sibun nu brojiryiis wesun.

Yah sa
frumista nimands qen, gadauJ>noda, un-
barnahs ;

30 Yah nam an))ar

swalt unbarnahs ;

qen, yah sa ga-

J)0

31 Yah jjridya nam })0 samalciko ;
samaleiko |)an yah J)ai sibuu, yah ni
bili| un barne, yah gaswultun ;

29 SeofoD gebrodru waeron.

And se
forma nam wif, and wa?s dead, butan
bcariie ;

30 Dii nam odcr hig, and WcTS dead

biitan bearne ;

31 Da nam se {n-idda hig; and swa
ealle seofone, and nan sa?d ne la'fdon,
and wseron deade

32 Spcdista allaize gadaujjnoda yah so

32 Da, ealra ytemcst wa?s dat wif

qens.

33 In ))izai usstns>;ai nu, wliaryis |'izo
|)ai auk sibun aihtedun ))o

wair))i]) qcus ?
du qenai.

34 Yah andliafvands qaj> du Vm lesus,
pai sunyus })is aiwis Hugand, yah liug-
an(hi ;

3^)

I)'

|>aiei wairj^ai sind yainis aiwis

dead.

33 On dam scryste, hwylces liyra wif

bijVdivt?

34 Da cwa'j) se Hjtlend to him, Dysse
woruhle beam wifia}), and beoj) to giftum
gcscakle

35 Da de synd dwre worulde wjTde,

;

;

;

1

1

;

;

XX. 21-35-] WYCLirFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

407

whiche feyneden hem selue iuste, tliat
tbei scliulden take him in word, and
bitake him to the prince, and to the
power of the iustise.

2 1 And thei axiden him, seyinge,
Maistir, we witen, that thou seist and
techist ri^tly ; and thou takist not per-
soone of man, but thou techist in treuth
the wey of God.

forth spies, whych shulde fayne them
perfecte, to take hym in hys
selves
wordes, and to dely\Te hym vnto the
power, and auctorite off the presydent.

2

And they axed hym, sayinge, Master,
we knowe, that thou sayest and teachest
considerest thou eny
ryght ;
mannes degre, but teachest the waye of
God truely.

nether

2 2 Is it leefful to vs to ^yue tribute to

22 Ys it laufuU for vs to geve Cesar

Cesar, ether nay 1

23 Forsothe he biholdinge the disseyt
of hem, seide to hem. What tempte 5e
me ?

24 Schewe ^e to me a peny ; whos
ymage and wi"itynge aboue hath it 1
Thei answeringe seiden to him, Cesaris.
25 And he seide to hem, Therfore ^elde
5e to Cesar tho thingis that ben of
Cesar, and tho thingis that ben of God,
to God.

26 And thei my^ten not reproue his
word bifore the pore peple ; and thei
wondringe in his answere, helden pees.

27 Summe of the Sadducees, that de-
nyen a3en rysinge to be, nei3eden, and
axiden him,"

28 Seyinge, Maistir, Moyses wrot to
vs, if the brother of ony man hauynge
wyf deiede, and he was with oute fre
children, that his brother take his wyf,
and reyse seed to his brother.

29 Therfore seuene britheren weren.
The firste took a wyf, and is deed, with
outen sones

30 And the brother suwinge took hir,

and he is deed with oute sone ;

31 And the thridde took hir; also and
alle seuene, and leften no seed, but ben
deede

32 And the womman the laste of alle
is deed.

33 Tiicrforc in the risynge a3ein, wlios
forsothe

wyf of hem schal schc be?
seuene haddcn hir wyf.

34 And Jhcsu seide to hem, Soncs of
this world wedden, and ben ^ouun to
weddingis

35 Forsothe thei that Ijc worth i to

tribute, or noo 1

23 He perceaved their craftynes, and

sayde vnto them, Why tempt ye me 1

24 Shewe me a peny; whoose ymage
and superscripcion hath it ? They an-
swered and sayd, Cesars.

25 And he sayde vnto them, Geve then
vnto Cesar that which belongeth vnto
Cesar, and to God, that whych pertayn-
eth to God.

26 And they coulde nott reprove his
sayinge before the people ; and they
marvayled at his answer, and helde their
peace.

27 Then cam to hym certayne off the
Saduces, which denye that there is eny
resurreccion, and they axed hym,

28 Sayinge, Master, Moses wrote vnto
vs, if eny mannes brother dye havinge a
wyfe, and the same dye wyth out issue,
that then hys brother shulde take his
wj^'e, and rayse vp seede vnto hys bro-
ther.

29 There were seven brethren. And
the fyrst toke awyfe, and died, with out
children

30 And the seconde toke the wyfe,

and he dyed chyldlesse ;

3

And the thyrde toke her ; and in
lyke wyse the resydue off the seven, and
lecft noo chyldren be hynde them, and
dyed

3 2 Last of all the woman dyed also.

33 Nowe at the resurreccion, whose
wyfe of them shall she be 1 for vij had
her to wyfe.

34 Jesus answered and sayd vnto thoni,
The chyldren off this worldc niary wyvcs,
and arc marycd ;

35 But they which shalbc woithy of

;
;

408

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

niutaii, yah iisstassais us dau})aim, nl
liugaud, ni liugaiula,

-

and serystes of deajmm, nc giftiaj? hi, ne
wif ne laeda|),

36 Nih allis gaswiltan ]5anasei)?s niag-
un ; ibnans au^gilum auk siiul, yah suu-
yus sincl Gu|)S, usstassais sunyus wis-
andans.

37 A|;|)an ])atci urreisand daujjans, yah
Moses bauwida ana aiwhatuudyai, swe
qij)i)>, Suwh Frauyan Gu|> Al)rahamis,
yah Gu]) Isakis, yah Gu)? lakobis.

36 Ne ofer da^t sweltan ne magon
hig synd sojjlice engUim gehce, and hig
synd Godes beam, donne hig synd seryst-
es beam.

37 Fordam de s6|)Hce deade arisa]',
and Moyses 8et-ywde wid scnne beig-
bcam, swa he cwa^}), Drihten Abrahames
God, and Isaaces God, and lacobes God.

38 A}i|)an Gu|) nist daujaize, ak qiwaize;

allai auk imma liband.

38 Nys God deadra, ac lybbendra

ealle hig him lybba]?.

39 Andhafyandans jjan sumai |)ize bok-

aryc qej^un, Laisari, wail a qast.

40 Nij)-|)an

|;anasei|^s
fraihnan ina ni waihtais.

gadaurstedun

41 Qa)? |)au du im, Whaiwa qij^and,

Christu sunu Daweidis wisan,
42 Yah silba Daweid ([i]>\\y m bokom
Psahno, Qa|) Frauya du frauyin mein-
amma, Sit af taihswon meinai,

43 Unte ik galagya fiyands jjeinans

fotubaurd fotiwe j)einaize.

44 Daweid ina frauyan

whaiwa sunus imma ist ?

39 Da andswaredon him sumc daera
bocera and cwsedon, Lareow, wel dii
cwsede.

40 And hig hine leng ne dorston scnig
])ing acsian.

41 Da cw?e|) he to him, Hwi sccga])

hig, dset Crist sy Dauides sunu,

42 And Dauid cwy|> on dam Seahne,
Drihten ssede to minum drihtnc, Site on
mine swidran healfe,

43 Od da3t ic jisette dine fynd to fot-
sceamele dinra fota.

haiti|>, yah

44 Dauid hine clypaj) drihten, and hu-

meta ys he hys sunu ?

45 At galiausyandein |:)an alhxi man-

45 Da saede he hys leorning-cnihtum,

agcin, qaj) du siponyam scinaim,

ealhun folce geliyrendum,

46 Atsaiwhi|> faura bokaryam, Jjaim

wilyandam gaggan in wheitaim ....

46 Warniajj wid da boceras, da dc
wylla}? on gegyrlum gan, and lufia|>
grctiiiga on straete, and da yhlstan setl
on gesamnungum, and da forman hleon-
unga on gcbcorscy]niiu ;
47 Da forswelgaj) wuikiwena Inis, liiw-
igendc lang gebed ; da onfdji maran
genyderunge.

Chap. XXI.

i Da he hine bescah,
he geseh da welegan hcora lac sendan
on done sceoppan ;

2 Da gcseah ho sumc carmc wudowan

bringan twcgen feor})lingas.

3 Da cwte}) he, So)) ic eow secge, da?t
deos earme wudewe ealra mscst brohte.

4 Soj'es ealle das brohton Gode Itic,
of liyra mycelan welan ; deos wudewe

1

;

1

XX. 36.-XXT. 4.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

409

that world, and rysing a^en fro deede
men, neither ben weddid, nether wedden
wyues,

36 Nether schulen mowe deye more ;
forsoth thei ben euene with aungels, and
ben the sones of God, sithen thei ben
the sones of rysinge a3en.
37 Forsothe for deede men rysen a^en,
also Moyses schewide bysyde the boysche,
as he seith, The Lord God of Abraham,
and God of Isaac, and God of Jacob.

38 Forsoth God is not of deede men,
but of lyuynge men ; forsoth alle men
lyuen to hym.

39 Sothli summe of the scribis answer-
inge seide, Maistir, thou hast well seide.

40 And thei durste no more axe him

ony thing.

Forsoth he seide to hem, How seyn

4

men, that Crist is the sone of Dauith,

42 And Dauith him silf seith in the
book of Salmes, The Lord seide to my
k)rd, Sitte thou on my ri^t half,

43 Til I putte thin enemyes a stool of

that worlde, and of the resurreccion from
deeth, nether mary wyves, nether are
maryed,

36 Nor yet can dye eny moare ; for
they are equall vnto the angels, and are
the sonnes of God, in as moche as they
are the chyldren off the resurreccion.
37 And that the deed shall ryse agayne,
even Moses signified besydes the busshe,
when he sayde, The Lorde God of Abra-
ham, and the God off Isaac, and the
God of Jacob.

38 For he is not the God off the deed,
but off them whych live ; for all live in
hym.

39 Certayne off the Pharises answered
and sayd, Master, thou hast wele sayde.

40 And after that durst they not axe

hym eny question at all.

4

Then sayd he vnto them, Howe saye

they, that Christ ys Davides sonne,

42 And David hym silfe sayth in the
boke off the Psalmes, The Lorde sayde
vnto my lorde, Sytt on my ryght honde,
43 Tyll I make thyne enemys thy fote

thi feet.

stole.

44 Therfore Dauith clepith him lord,

and how is he his sone 1

45 Sothli al the pcple heeringe, he

seyde to his disciplis,

46 Be 36 war of scribis, that wolen go
in stoolis, and louen salutaciouns in the
cheping, and the firste chayris in syna-
gogis, and the firste sitting places in
feestis ;

47 Whichc deuouren the

housis

"widowis, feynynge long preier ;
Bchulen take more dampnacioun.

of
thes

44 David then called hym lorde, howe
ys he also hys sonne 1

45 Then in the audience off all the

people, he sayde vnto his disciples,

46 Beware off the scrybes, whych de-
syre to goo in longe clothynge, and love
gi'etynges in the marketes, and the hyest
seates in the sinagoges, and chefe roumes
at feastes ;
47 Which devoure widdowes houses,
and praye longe vnder a coloure ; the
same shall receave greater damnacion.

Chap. XXL i Forsothe he bihold-
ingo Hy3 tho richc men, whichc scntcn
her ^iftis in to the tresoric

f

2 Forsothe he sy3 also sum litcl pore

widowc sendyngc twcic litlc monoyH.^

3 And he seyde, Trculi I seyc to 50U,
for this pore widowc sontc more than
allc men.

4 P'orwhi allc thes sentcn in to ^iftis
of God, of the thing plentcuously to

Chap. XXL

i As he behelde he
sawe the rychc men, howe they cast in
their offcringes into the tresury;

2 He sawc also a certayne i)ovrc wid-

dowc which cast in thydrc two mytes.

3 And he said, Of a trueth I sayo vnto
you, tliis povro widdowe hath putt in
moare then they all.

4 For they all have of their supcr-
fluyte, added vnto the offcrynge off God;

410

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

;

;

;

brohtc of dam etc heo hnefdc, ealle liyre
andlyfciic.

5 And da cwa'l? he, to dam de ssedon
be dam temple, da't liit wa're geglenged
mid godum staniim and godmn gifum,

6 Das jnng de ge geseoj^, da dagas
cumaj>, on dam ne bij> stau lacfcd ofer
Stan, de ne beo toworpen.

hwa3nne

7 Da acsodon liig liine, La l)cbcod-
and
end,
hwylce tacna beo]>, donne das |)ing ge-
weorda]> 1

|)ing 1

beo)>

das

8 Da cwib|> lie, Warnia|>, da?t ge ne
syn beswicene ; manige cuma|> on minum
naman, and cweda|>, Ic hit eom, and
tid genealaec]) ; ne fare ge a-fter him.

9 Ne beo ge bregede, donne ge geseoj^
gefeoht and twy-ra?dncssa ; das ))ing ge-
byrigeaj? seryst, ac nys donne gyt ende.

10 Da c\yvo]> he to him, pcod arist

ongean j^code, and rice ongean rice ;

*

T I And beo}> mycele cor)\an «;tyniiit,'a
geond stowa, and cwealmas, and hiinL;(.r,
and egsan of heofene, and mycele tacnu

\)eo]>.

12 Actoforan eallum dissnm hig nima})
eow, and ehtaj>, and [syllajj]^ eow on ge-
samnunga and on hynlnyssa, and la^da}?
eow to cyningum and to dcnuim, for
minum naman

13 Dys eow gebyra]) on gcwitnesse.

14 Ne scyle ge on cowrum heortum

fure-smcagean, hu ge andswarion ;

15 Tc sylle cow muj> and wisdom, dam
nc magon ealle cower widcrwinnan wid-
standan,^nd widcwedan.

16 Ge beoj) gcsealde fram ma;jnm, and
gebrodrum, and ciidum, and frcondum,
and hig cow to dcajic gcswcnca|>

17 And ge beo|) eallum on hatunga for

milium naman.

18 And nc forwyr}) an loco of cowrum

hcafdc

7
1

;

;

;

4
2
7
1

;

;

;

XXI. 5-i8.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

411

Iiem ; forsothe this widowe of this thing
that fayleth to hir, sente al hir lyfloode,
that she hadde.

5 And sum men seyinge of the temple,
that it was ourned with goode stoones
and 5yftis, he seyde,

6 Thes thingis that ^e

seen, dayes
schulen come, in which a stoon schal
not be left on a stoon, which schal not
be distroyed.

7 Sothli thei axiden him, seyinge, Com-
aundour, whanne schulen thes thingis
be 1 and what tokene, whanne thei
schulen bigynne to be don 1

8 Which seide, Se ^e, that 5e be not
disceyued ; forsothe manye schulen come
in my name, seyinge, For I am, and the
tyme schal nei3e ; therfore nyle 56 go
aftir hem.

9 But whanne ^e schulen heere batels
and dissenciouns with ynne, nyle 56 be
it bihoueth first thes thingis to
aferd ;
be don, but not 5it a noon the ende.

TO Thanne he seide to hem, Folk schal
ryse a3ens folk, and rewme a^ens rewme;

1

iVnd grete mouyngis of erthe schulen
be by places, and pestilensis, and hun-
gris, and dredis fro heuene, and grete
tokenes schulen be.

12 But bifore alle thes thingis thei
schulen sette hir hondis on 50U, and
schulen pursuwe, bitakinge in to syna-
gogis and kepingis,'*' drawynge to kingis
and iustisis, for my name

13 Forsothe it schal bifalle to 50U in

but she of her penury, hath cast in all
the substaunce, that she hadde.

5 As some spake of the temple, howe
it was garnesshed with goodly stones
and iewels, he sayde,

6 The dayes wyll come, when off these
thynges which ye se, shall nott be lefte
stone apon stone, that shall nott be
throwen doune.

7 And they axed hym, sayinge. Master,
when shall these thynges be ? and what
signes will there be, when suche thynges
shall come to passe ?

8 And he sayd, Take hede, that ye
be not deceaved ; for many will come
in my name, saying of them selves, I
am he, and the tyftie draweth neare
folowe ye nott them therfore.

9 Butt when ye heare of warre and
dissencion, be not afrayd ; for these
thynges must fyrst come, butt the ende
foloweth not by and by.

10 Then sayd he vnto them, Nacion
shall ryse agaynst nacion, and kyngdom
agaynst kingdom

1

And greate erthquakes shalbe in all
quarters, and honger, and pestilence,
and fearfull thinges, and greate signes
shall there be from heven.

1

But before all these they shall laye
their hondes on you, and persecute you,
delyverynge you vppe to the synagoges
and into preson, and brynge you before
kynges and rulers, for my names sake ;
13 And this shall chaunche you ffor a

to witnessing'.

testimoniall.

14 Tlierfore putte 5e in ^oure hertis,
not to thenke bifore, how 30 schulen
ianswere

15 For I schal 3yue to 30U mouth and
wysdom, to whichc alle 30ure aduer-
sarics schulen not mowe a3enstonde, and
a3enscye.

1

Lett it sticke therfore faste in youre
hertes, nott once to stody before, whatt
ye shall answere for youre selves ;

15 For I will geve you a mouth and
wysdom, were agaynste all youre adver-
sarys shall not be able to speak e, nor
resist.

16 Sothli 3c schulen ])C bytraycd of
fadir, and modir, and brithcrcn, and
cosyns, and frcndis, and by decth thei
schulen turmcnto surarna of 30U ;

And 30 schulen be hutid of alle men

1

for my name.

16 Ye and yc shalbe betrayed of youro
fathers, and mothers, and of youre bre-
thren, and kynsinen, and lovers, and
some of you shall they j)ut to decth ;

And hated shall yc be off all men

1

for my names sake.

18 And an hecr of jourc heed schal

18 Yet there shall not one hecr of

Dot pcrischc

youre hccddcs pcrissc

412

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

;

19 On eowrum gejjylde ge gebealda})

cowre sawla.

20+Donne ge geseoj) Hierusalem mid
here betrymede, wita}), daet hyre toworp-
ennes geneal3ec|j.

21 Donne fleoj? on muntas, da de on
Tudea synd ; and nydcr ne astiga}), da
de on hyre middele synd ; and into byre
ne rnugon, da de dser-ute synd.

22 Fordam de dis s}Tid wrace dagas,
daet ealle J)ing syn gefyllede, de awritene
synd.

23 S5})lice wa eacnigendum wife, and
fedendum on dam dagum ; donne bij>
mycel of[)riccednes ofer eorjjan, and }Tre
disum folce.

24 And big feaHaj) on sweordcs ccgc,
|>eoda

and beoj) baiftlingas on calle
Hierusalem bi}) fram |)Codiim fortreden,
od mseg]?a tida synd gefyllede.

25 And beo]j tacnu on sunnan, and on
monan, and on steorrum ; and on eorjian
for})riecednes, for gcdrcfeduesse
|)eoda
sses sweges and yda ;

26 Bifi2:endum mannum for ecre and
anbide de eallum ymbe-bwyrftc to-be-
cuma|) ; donne beo)? bcofoncs mybta
astyrede.

27 And donne big gesco)) manncs sunu
on lyftc cumende, mid mycelum anwalde
and nuvgen-j^rymme.

28 Donne das |)ing ag}Tina}i, beseo|^,
and eowre beafdu upabebba|i, fordam dc
cower alyscdnes gcnealacc]^.

29 Da Sccde be bim sum bigspcl, Be-
bcalda)> done fic-bcam, and calle trcowa,

30 Donne big wfcstm bringaj>, ge witOD

da^t sumor ys gcbende ;

31 And donne ge das j)ing geseoj),

wita)>, daet Godcs rice is gebende.

32 Soj'Hce

ic cow secge.

daet dcos

9

;

9

;

XXL 19-32.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

413

1

In 50ure pacience 50 schulen welde

With youre pacience possesse youre

1

5oure soulis.

soules.

20 Forsoth whanne 50 schulen se Je-
rusalem enuyrowned of an oost of hatel,
thanne wite ^e, that the desolacioun
therof schal nei3e.

21 Thanne thei that ben in Judee, flee
in to hillis ; and thei that hen in the
myddel of it, go awey ; and thei that
hen in the cuntreis, entre not in to it.

2 2 For thes ben the dayes of veniaunce,
that alle thingis that ben writun, be

fillid.

23 Forsothe wo to hem, that ben with
childe, and norischen in tho dayes ; for
a greet tribulacioun schal be on erthe,
and wraththe to this peple.

24 And thei schulen falle in the mouth
of swerd, and thei schulen be ledd caytif
in to alle folkis ; and Jerusalem schal
be defoulid of hethen men, til the tymes
of naciouns be fillid.

25 And tokenes schulen be in the
sunne, and moone, and sterris ; and in
the erthe scJial he ouerleying of folkis,
for confusioun of sown of the see and
wa^vis

26 Men waxinge drye for drede and
abidinge that schulen come on al the
world ; forwhi vertues of heuene schulen
be mouyd.

27 And thanne thei schulen se mannis
Bone coniynge in a cloude, with greet
power and raaieste.

28 Sothli thes thingis bigynnynge to
be don, biholde 3e, and rcyse 30 ^oure
hecdis, for 3oure a3en hying nei3ith.

29 And he seidc to hem a licnesse, Se

56 the (ige tree, and alle trees,

0,0 Whanne thei })rin;rcn foith of licm

fruyt now, 30 witen for soiaer is ni3 ;

31 So also, whanne 3e scliulcn se thes
tlie

to bo don, wite 3e,

thingis
kyngdom of God is nyj.

for

20 And when ye se Jerusalem beseged
with an hoste, then vnderstonde, that
the desolacion of the same is nye.

21 Then lett them which are in lewry,
flye to the mountaynes ; and let them
which are in the myddes off hit, departe
oute ; and lett not them that are in
other countreis, enter there in.

22 For these be the dayes of venge-

aunce, to fulfill all that are written.

23 Butt wo be to them, that be with
chylde, and to them that geve sucke in
for there shalbe greate
those dayes ;
trouble in the londe, and Avrathe over
all this people.

24 And they shall fal on the edge of
the swearde, and they shalbe leed cap-
tiue in to all nacions ; and Jerusalem
shalbe trooden vnder fote off the gen-
tyls, vntyll the tyme of the geutyls be
fulfilled.

25 And there shalbe signes in the
sunne, and in the mone, and in the
starres ; and in the erth the people
shalbe in soche perplexite, that they
shall not tell which waye to turne them
selves, the see and the waves shall roore ;
26 And mennes hertes shall fayle them
for feare and for lokynge after thoose
thinges which shall come on the erth
for the powers of heven shall move.

27 And then shall they se the sonne of
man come in a clowde, with power and
greate glory.

28 When these thynges begyn to come
to passe, then loke vppe, and lifte vppe
youre heddes, for youre rcdenicion druw-
ith neye.

29 And he shewed them a similitude,
Beholde the fygge tree, and all other
trees,

30 Wlien they shute forth their buddes,
ye se and knowe of youre awne selves
that Honmier is then neye utt bond ;

3 I Soo lyke wyse ye, when ye ho these
thynges come to juisse, vnderstonde, that
the kyngdom of (Jod is neye.

32 Treuli I seie to 30U, for tliis gencra-

32 Vcrely I saic vnto you, this geucra-

414

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Like

encores ne gewit, serdam de calle d's
|)ing geweordon.

33 Heofen and eor|7e gewitaj), s6j)licc

mine word ne gewita^.^

34 Waruia)> eow, de-laes eower hcortan
geliefegode syn on ofer-fyllc, and on
druncennesse, and discs lifes caruni, and
on eow se faerlica dag becume ;

35 Swa swa grin he bccym]) on ealle,

da de sittaj) ofer eorj^an ansyne.

36 Wacia|> on alcere tide, and bidtla)>,
diet ge weorde syn da't ge dJs towcrdan
J)ing forfleon, and staudan beforan man-
nes suna.
37 S5|)lice he wxa on da'g on dam
temple Iserende, and on niht he code
and wunode on dam munte, de ys ge-
cwedcn Oliueti.

38 And call folc on morgen com to
him, to dam temple, dset hi bine ge-
hyrdon.

CiiAP. XXII.

^1 Da s6j)lice genea-
Isehte freols-da^g azimorum, se is ge-
cwcden eastre.

2 And dara saccrda eaUlras and da
boccras smcadon, hu hig hinc forsi)ildon,
s6))lice hig ondredou him daet folc.

3 Da code Satanas on ludani, sc wa>s
odre naman Scarioth, an of dam twelf-
um.

4 Da ferdc he, and spriec mid dara
sacerda caldor-mannnm, and dumide
ealdrum, hii he hine him gescalde,

5 And hig fagcnodoD, and him wed-

dcdon feoh to syllanne.

6 And he behet, and he sohte hu he
cadclicost hinc, be-ieftan divre meucgo,
{jcscalde.
o

7 Da com se daeg azimonmi, on dam

hi woldon h}Ta eastron gewyrcan.

8 And he seude Petnim and lohannem,
and cwa^j) to him, Fara|> and gcarwia}>
us, da^t we lire eastron gewyrcon.

9 Da cwredon hig, Hwai' wylt du, da:'t

we gearwion ]

XXI. 33-XXII. 9.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

415

cioun schal not passe, til alle tlaingis be

5

cion shall not passe, tyll all be fulfilled.

* don.

33 Heuene and ertbe scliulen passe,

but my wordis scbulen not passe.

34 Forsotbe take ^e beede to 30U silf,
lest per auenture ^oure bertis be greuyd
witb glotenye, and drunkenesse, and
bisynessis of tbis lyf, and tbilke day
come sudeyn on 30U ;

35 For as a snare it scbal come on
alle men, tbat sitten on tbe face of al
ertbe.
36 And so wake 5e, preiynge in ecb
tyme, tbat 3e be wortbi to fle alle tbes
tbingis tbat scbulen come, and to stonde
Lifore mannis sone.

37 Forsotb in dayes be was tecbinge
in tbe temple, but be goynge out dwell-
ide in ny^tis in tbe bil, wbicb is clepid
of Olyuete.

38 And al tbe peple roos erly, to come

to bim in tbe temple, for to beere bim.

33 Heven and ertb shall passe, but my

wordes shall not passe.

34 Take bede to youre selves,

lest
youre hertes be overcome witb surfett-
ynge, and dronkennes, and cares of tbis
worlde, and tbat tbat daye come on you
vnwares ;

35 For as a snare shall bit come on all

them, tbat sit on tbe face of tbe ertbe.

36 "VVatcbe tberfore continually, and
praye, tbat ye maye scape all tbis tbat
sbal come, and tbat ye maye stonde
before tbe sonne of man.

37 In the daye tyme taught be in tbe
temple, and at nygbt be went out, and
bad abydynge in tbe mount Olivete.

38 And all tbe people cam in tbe morn-
ynge to hym, into tbe temple, for to
heare hym.

Chap. XXII.

i Forsotbe tbe bali-
day of tberf looues, wbicb is seid paske,
nei3ede.

2 And tbe princes of prestis and tlie
Bcribis sou3ten, bou tbei scbulden slee
Jbesu, but tbei dredden tbe peple.

3 Sotbli Satlianas entride in to Judas,
tbat was clepid Scariotb, oon of tbe
twelue.

4 And be wente, and spak witb tbe
princes of prestis, and witb tbe mages-
tratis, how be scbulde bitraye bim to
hem.

5 And tiiei ioyeden, and madcn coucn-

aunt to 3yuc money to bim.

6 And lie bilii3te, and lie sou3te couen-
ablete, tbat lie scbulde bitraye bim, witb
outc the cumpanyes.

7 Sothly the day of therf looues cam,
in which it was nede, tbat paak^ be
Blayn.

8 And he scnte Petre and John, sey-
ingo, 3e goynge make rcdy pask to va,
that we etc.

9 And tbei seidcn. Where wolt thou,

that we make rcdy 1

Chap. XXII.

i Tbe feaste off swete

breed drue nye, whych is called ester.

2 And tbe bye prestes and scrybes
sought, howe to kyll Jesus, but they
feared tbe people.

3 Then entred Satan into Judas, whose
syr name was Iscariot, wbicb was of tbe
nombre off tbe twelve.

4 And he went his waye, and com-
mened with the bye prestes, and officers,
how he wolde betraye hym vnto them.

5 And they were glad, and promysed

to geve hym money.

6 And he consented, and sought opor-
tunitc, to betraye hym vnto them, when
the people were awayc.

7 Then cam that daye of swete breed,
when off necesbite, the ester lambc nmstc
be offered.

8 And he sent Peter and Jhon, seiynge,
Goo and prepare vs _'the ester lambe,
that we maye cate.

S

9 They saydc to hym, Where wilt thou,

that we prepare 1

410

GOTHIC, 360.

6
4
9
7

;

;

ANGLO-SAXON, 995-

[St. Luke

10 And he cwfej) to him, Nii ! doune
ge on da ceastre gaj?, eow ageii yvu]> jIh
filigea}> him on
man mid w?eter-buce ;
daet hus, de he in-g3e}>.

11 And secgaj? dam hus-hlafordc, U're
lareow de secg|), Ilwar ys cumena hu3,
dar ic mine eastron wyrce mid miuum
leorning-cuihtmu ]

12 And he eow betaecj) mycele hcalle

gedaefte, gegearwiaj) dara.

13 Da ferdon hig, and gemetton swa
he him saede, and hig gegearwodon
eastrun.

And da tima wses, he sait, and his

1

twelf apostolas mid him.

15 And he saede him. Of gewilnunge
ic sewihiode etan mid eow das eastron,
ser ic for|)-fare

Ic eow sccgc, dset ic heonon-forj) ne

1

ete, ser hit sy on Godes rice gefylled.

1

And onfeng calico, and [ancas dyde,
and cwa3]), Oufoji, and dacla}) betwux
eow

18 S6))licc ic cow secge, da^t ic ne drince
of discs win-geardt'S cynnc, scr Godcs
rice cumc.

1

And he onfcng hhife, and jiancode,
and him sealdc, and c\\iv\>, Dis is miu
lichama, sc is for eow geseald ; do)) dis
on min gemynd.

20 And swii eac done calic, syddan he
ge-eten lia'fdc, and cwa^|>, Dcs calic is
niwe gccydnes on minum blode, sc h\\>
for eow agotcn.

21 Deah hwaedere, her is daes Isewan

hand mid me on mysan.

22 And witodlicc manncs sunu ga'J>,
a^ftcr dam de him fore-stihtod wa^s ;
deah hwa>dcre wa dam men, de he jmrh
geseald bil>.

23 And hi agunnon bctNvnx him smea-
gan, hwylc of him dset to donue wsere.

24 And hi fliton bet>v\ix him, hwylc

h}Ta waere yldcst.

8
2
1

9
1
1

XXII. IO-24.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

!

417

I o And he seide to hem, Lo ! 5011 en-
tringe in to the citee, sum man beringe
a vessel with watir schal come a3ens
50U ; sue ^e him in to the hous, in to
which he entrith.

Ti And 5e schulen seye to the hose-
bonde man of the hous, The maistir
seith to thee, Where is the herborgerie,
where I schal ete pask with my dis-
ciplis 1

1

And he schal schewe to 50U a greet
souping place strewid, and there make
5e redy.

13 Sothli thei goynge founden as he
seide to hem, and there thei maden
redy the paske.

14 And whanne the our was maad, he
sat to the mete, and twelue apostlis
with him.

15 And he seide to hem, With desyr
I haue desyrid to ete with 50U this pask,
bifore that I suffre ;

16 Forsothe I seie to 50U, for fro this
tyme I shal not ete it, til it be fillid in
the rewme of God.

17 And the cuppe takun, he dide
thankingis, and seide. Take 3e, and de-
parte ^e among 50U ;

1

Forsothe I seie to 50U, I schal not
drynke of the generacioun of this vyne,
til the rewme of God come.

19 And the breed takun, he dide
thankingis, and brak, and 3af to hem,
seyinge, This is my body, which schal
be 30uun for 30U ; do 3e this thing in
to my commemoracioun.

20 Also and the chalys, aftir that he
hadde soupid, seyinge, This cuppe is the
newe testament in my blood, which
schal be sclied for 30U.

2

Netheles lo I the bond of a man

bitrayinge mc is with me in the bord.

22 And sothli mannis sone goth, vp
netheles wo to
that it is determynd ;
that man, bi whom he schal be bitraycd.

23 And tliei bigynncn to seclic among
hem si If, who it was of hem, that was
to doynge this thing.

24 And stryf was maad among liem,
which of hem schulde be seyn to be
more.

10 And he sayde vnto them, Beholde
as ye enter into the cite, there shall
a man mete you bearynge a pitcher
off water ; hym folowe into the same
housse, that he entreth in.

1

And ye shall saye vnto the goode
man off the housse, The master sayeth,
Where is the gest chamber, where I
shall eate myne ester lambe wyth my
dissciples 'i

12 And he shall shewe you a greate

parloure paved, there make redy.

13 They went and founde as he had
sayde vnto them, and made redy the
ester lambe.

14 And when the houre cam, he sate
doune, and the twelve apostles with
hym.

15 And he sayde vnto them, I have in-
wardly desyred to eate this ester lambe
with you, before that Y suffre ;

16 For I saye vnto you, hence forthe
I will nott eate of it eny moore, vntill
itt be fulfilled in the kyngdom of God.

17 And he toke the cuppe, and gave
thankes, and sayde, Receave this, and
devyde itt amonge you ;

18 For I saye vnto you, I will not
drynke of the frute of the vyne, vntill
the kyngdom of God be come.

1

And he toke breed, and gave thankes,
and brake itt, and gave it vnto them,
sayinge, Thys is my body, which is
geven for you ; thys do in the remem-
braunce of me.

20 Lykewyse alsoo when they had
supped, he toke the cuppe, sayinge. This
is the cuppe, the newe testamentt in my
bloud, which shall for you be shedde.

2

Yet beholde ! the honde off hym that

betrayeth me is with me on the table.

22 And the sonne of man goeth, as hit
is appoyntcd ; but wo be to that man,
by whom he is betrayed.

23 And they began to cn<iuyrc amonge
them selves, which off them it shuldo
be, that shulde do that.

24 And there was a stryfc amonge
them, which of them sliulde seme great-

est.

]•:

418

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

;

25 Da saede he him, Cyiiinpfas wcal(lii|>
hyra jjcoda, and cla de anweald ofer hig
habbaj) synd fremfuUe genemned,

26 Ac ne heo ge na swa; ac gewurde
he swa swa gingra, se de yldra ys be-
t^vux cow, and se de fore-stajppend ys,
beo he swylce he J^en sy.

27 Hwaeder ys yldra, de se de j^enaj^,
de se de sit 1 witodlice se de sit.
Ic
com on eowrum midlene, swa swa se de
jjcna}?.

28 Ge synd, de mid me |>urh-wunedon

on mTnum geswincum ;

29 And ic eow dihte, swa min feeder

me rice dihte,
30 Dset ge eton and drincon ofer mme
mysan on minum rice, and ge sitton
ofer j)rym-setl, demeude twelf mseg|)a
Israhel.
31 Da cwoej) Drihten Simon, Simon,
nu ! Satanas gyrnde, dset he eow lirid-
rode swa swa hwsete ;

32 Ic gebsed for de, dcet din geleafa
ne geteorige ; and du set sumum cyrre
gewend, getryme dine gebrodru.

33 Da cwje^ he, Drihten, ic eom gearu
to farenuc mid de, ge on cwerteru ge
on dea}j.
34 Da cwx]> he, Ic secge dc, Pctriis,
ne crsewj) se hana to-da3g, aer dii me
a3t-soecst.

35 D;i cwre}) he to him, Da ic cow
sonde butan scode, and coddc, and gcscy,
wfes eow senig |)ing wana ] Da cwaedon
hig, Nan J'ing.

36 Dii cwa^j) he, Ac nu se de hocf)) seod,
gclice nime codd ; and se de
na}f[), sylle his tunecau, and bycge him
swcord.

37 S6|)Hcc ic cow sccgc, da^t gyt sccal
boon gefylled da^t be mc a>vi'itcn is, And
da?t he mid unrihtwisum getcald wa?s
witodlice da |)ing de be me synd habbaj)
cnde.

38 And hig cwjedon, Drihten, her synd
cwae)). Diet is

And lie

twa sweord.
gcnoh.

39 And lefter gcwunan, he ut-eode on
d;vne muut Oliuarum, d»t is Ele-berg-

1

1

;

XXIL 25-39.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1^26,

419

25 Forsoth be seide to hem, Kyngis
of liethen men ben lordis^ of bem, and
tbei that ban power on hem ben clepid
goode 3yueris,

26 But 5e not so ; but he that is the
more in 50U, be maad as the 50Dgere,
and he that is bifore goer, as a seruaunt.

27 Forwhi who is the more, he that
restith, other he that mynistrith 1 wher
not he that restith 1 Forsoth I am in the
myddis of 50U, as he that mynistrith.

28 Sothli 5e it ben, that ban dwelt

with me in my temptaciouns ;

29 And I dispose to 50U, as my fadir

hath disposed to me, a rewme,

30 That 5e ete and drynke on my bord
in my rewme, and sitte on trones, dem-
ynge twelue kynredis of Israel.

3

Forsothe the Lord seide to Symount,
S^Tnount, lo ! Sathanas hath axid 50U,
that he schulde ridele as whete ;

32 But I haue preied for thee, that
thi feith fayle not ; and thou conuertid
Bum tyme, conferme thi britheren.
33 Which seide to him. Lord, I am
redi to go with thee, and in to prisoun
and in to deeth.
34 And he seide, I seie to thee, Peter,
the koc schal not crowe to day, til thou
thries forsake to knowe me.

35 And he seide to hem, Whanne I
sente 50U with oute sachel, and scrip,
and schoon, wher oriy thing failide to
50U ? And tbei seiden. No thing.

36 Therfore he seide to hem, I'ut now
he that hath a sachel, take also and a
Bcrippe ; and he that hath not, selle his
coote, and bye a sword.

37 Sothli I scic to 30U, for 31 1 it bi-
lioucth this thing that is writun to be
fulfillid in me. And he is dcmyd with
wickide men ; forsotlie tho thingis that
ben of me ban an cndc.

38 And tbei scidcn. Lord, lo ! twcye
And lie scydc to hem, It

Bwerdis here.
is ynow3.

25 And he sayde vnto them, The
kynges of the gentyls raigne over them,
and they that beare rule over them are
called gracious lordes,

26 But ye shall nott be soo ; but he
that is greatest amonge you, shalbe as
the yongest, and he that is chefe, shalbe
as minister.

27 For whether is greater, he that
sitteth at meate, or he that serveth ? is
not he that sitteth at meate ? And I
am amonge you, as he that ministreth.

28 Ye are, which have bidden with me

in my temptacions

29 And I apoynt vnto you a kyngdom,

as my father hath apoynted to me,

30 That ye maye eate and drynke at
my table in my kyngdome, and sit on
seates, and iudge the twelve tribes of
Israeli.

3

And the Lorde sayde, Simon, Simon,
Satan hath desired you, to

beholde !
sifte you as it were wheate ;

32 Butt I have prayed for the, that
thy fayth fayle nott ; and when thou
arte converted, strengthen thy brethren.
33 And he sayd vnto hym, Lorde, I
am redy to goo with the, in to preson
and to deth.

34 And he sayde, I tell the, Peter, the
cocke shall nott crowe this daye, till
thou have thryse denyed that thou
knewest me.
35 And he sayde vnto them, When I
sent you with out wallett, and scrippe,
and shoues, lacked ye eny thynge 1 And
they sayd. No thynge.

36 And he sayde to them, But nowe
he that hath a wallet, let him take itt
and lykewyse his scrippe ; and he thatt
hath noo swearde, let hym sell his coote,
and bye won.
37 I sayc vnto you, that 3Tt that which
is written must be performed in me,
Even with the wicked was he nombred ;
for those thynges which are written of
me have an ende.

38 And they sayd, Lorde, beholde /
And he sayde

here are two swoardcs.
vnto them, It is ynough.

39 And he gon out, wentc bi custom
in to the liil of Olyucs ; sothli and the

1

39 And he cam out, and went as he
' was wontc to mounte Olivetc ; and his

E c 2

420

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

ena ;
filigdon.

aud Lis

leormng-cnilitas him

40 Aiid da he com to daere st5we, he
saede him, Gebidda]?, daet ge on costnunge
ne gan.

41 And he waes fram him alocen, swa
mycel swa is anes stanes w^Tp ; and
gebigedum cneo"svum, he hine gebaed,

42 And cw£c}), Faeder, gif dii wylt,
afyr dysne calic fram me ; deah hwaedere
ne geweorde min willa, ac din.

43 Da set-ywde him Godes engel of
heofene, and hine gestrangode.

44 And he wa}s on gewinuc, and hine
hinge gebaed ; and his swat wa?s swylce
blades dropan on eorjjan yrnende.

45 And da he of gebede aras, and com
to his leorning-cnihtum, he hig funde
slsepende for unrotnesse.

46 And he ssede him, Hwi slape ge 1
Ansa]), and biddaj>, dset ge on costnunge
ne gan.
47 Him da da gyt sprecendum, da
com daet wered, and him to-foran code
an of dam twelfum, se waes genemned
ludaa ; and he genealaehte dam Hael-
ende, daet he hine cyste.

48 Da cwaej) se Hselend, ludas, mannes

sunu du mid cosse sylst 1

49 Da gesawon da de him abutan
wacron, d;et dicr towerd waes, and cwaed-
on, Drihten, slca we mid swoordo 1

50 Da sloh h}Ta Cm dura saccrda caldres

|)eow, aud his swydro care of-aeerf.

51 Da andswarode se HiClcnd, Lieta)>
dus. And da he a^t-hran his eare, he
hit gehacldc.

52 Da cwa'j> se Ha?lcud to dam caldor-
mauuum, and to dam witum, aud da?s
temples ealdrum, Ge ferdon swa swa to
anum scea|>an mid swcordum and mid
sahlum, diet ge me gefcngon ?
53 Da ic waes da'ghwamlice on temple
mid cow, ne a}iencdon ge eower handa
on me ; ac dis is cower tid, and jiystra
anwcald.

XXIL40-53] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

421

disciplis sueden him.

disciples folowed hym.

40 And whanne he cam to the place,
lie seyde to hem, Preie ^e, lest je eutre
in to temptacioun.

41 And he was takun awey fro hem,
as myche as is a stoones cast ; and the
knees put, he preide,

42 Seyinge, Fadir, if thou wolt, turn
ouer this cuppe fro me ; netheles not
my wille be don, but thin.

43 Forsoth an aungel apperide to him

fro heuene, cumfortinge him.

44 And he maad in agonye,^ preiede
lengere ; and his swoot was maad as
di'opis of blood rennynge doun in to
the erthe.

45 And whanne he hadde rise

fro
preier, and hadde come to his disciplis,
he fond hem slepinge for heuynesse.

46 And he seide to hem, What slepen
56 ? Ryse 3e, and preie ^e, that 5e entre
not in to temptacioun.

47 3it him spekinge, lo ! a cumpany,
and he that was clepid Judas, oon of
the twelue, wente bifore hem ; and he
nei^ede to Jhesu, that he schulde kisse
him.

48 Sothli Jhesu seide to him, Judas,
bitrayest thou mannis sone with a coss 1

49 Forsoth thei that wcren aboutc
hym, seynge the thing that was to com-
ynge, seiden to him. Lord, wher we
smyten by swerd 1

50 And oon of hem smoot the seruaunt
of the prince of the prestis, and kittidc
of his litel ri3t cere.

51 Forsothe Jhesu answcringc seyde,
And whanne he
Suffre 3c til hidur.
hadde touchid his litil eere, he heelide
him.

52 Forsothe Jhesu seide to hem, that
camen to him, the princes of prestis,
and magestratis, and eldcrc men, As to
a thccf 3c han gon out with swcrdis and
staucs *}

53 Whanne I was cchc day with 30U
in the temple, 30 strei^tcn not out the
hondis into mc ; but tliis is 3ourc our,
and the power of derkncssis.

40 And when he cam to the place, he
sayde to them, Praye, lest ye fall into
temptacion.

41 And he gate hym silfe from them,
about a stones cast ; and kneled doune,
and prayed,

42 Sayinge, Father, if thou wilt, with-
drawe this cuppe from me ; neverthe-
lesse nott my wyll, butt thyne be ful-
filled.

43 And there apered an angell vnto

hym from heven, confortynge hym.

44 And he was in agony, and prayed
somwhat longer ; and hys sweate was
lyke droppes of bloud tricklynge doune
to the grounde.

45 And he rose vppe from prayer, and
cam to his disciples, and founde them
slepynge for sorowe.
46 And he sayde vnto them, Why slepe
ye 1 Ryse, and praye, lest ye fall into
temptacion.
47 Why 11 he yet spake, beholde ! there
cam a company, and he that was called
Judas, one off the twelve, went before
them ; and preased neye vnto Jesus, to
kysse hym.

48 Jesus sayd vnto hym, Judas, be-
trayest thou the sonne off man with a
kysse 1
49 When they which were about hym
sawe what wolde folow, they sayde vnto
hym, Lorde, shall we smyte with a
swearde 1

50 And one off them smote a servaunt
off hym, which was the chefe preste of
all, and smote off his righte eare.

51 Jesus answered and sayde, Soffre
ye thus farre forthe. And he touched
his eare, and healed hym.

52 Jesus sayde vnto the hye prcstes,
and rulers off the temple, and the sen-
yours, which were come to hym, Be ye
come outt as vnto a thefc with swcardcs
and staves 1

53 When I was dayly with you in the
temple, ye stretched not forth liondcs
agayust me ; butt this is even youre
very houre, and the power off darkncs.

422

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

54 D^ namon big liine, and Iscddon to
dsera sacerda ealdres huse ; and Petrus
fyligde feorran.

55

And Petrus wses mid him
on middan dam cafer-tune, dar big a^t
dam fyre seeton.

56 Da bine geseab sum |)inen a;t Icobte
sittendne, and bine bebeold, da cwa^j)
beo, And des wses mid bim.

57 Da set-soc be, and cwse|>, Eala wif,
ne can ic bine.

58 And da ymbe lytel bine geseab
Da

oder, and cwae^, Dii eart of bim.
cwae]) Petrus, Eala ! mann, ic ne eom.

59 And da aefter lytlum fjece swylce
anre tide, sum oder sedde, and cwcej),
S6])lice des waes mid bim ; witodlice be
is Galileisc.

60 Da cwa?|) Petrus, Eala man, niit
segst. And da big da^t

ic bwaet dii
sprsecon, samnunga se bana creow.

61 Da Dribten bewende bine, and
bescab to Petre ; da gemunde Petrus
Dribtnes wordes, dc be cwa?j>, Da't dii
min set-ssecst jn-iwa to-dag, ser se bana
crawe.

62 Da code Petrus ut, and biterlice

weop.

63 And da de done Haelcnd beoldon,

bine bysmredon and bcoton.

64 And ofer-wrugon bis ansync, and
bis nebb, and acsoilon bine,

|)urcson
A'rsed, bwylc is se de dc sloli ?

65 And manega odre jnng big bim to

cwaedon dysigende.

66 And da da diecf wses, da toija^dero
comon das folces yldran, and dara sa-
cerda caldor-menn, and boccras, and
gemote, and
laeddon
cwadon,

bine

to

byi*a

67 Sege us, gif dii sy Crist. Da cwaj>
be, Deab ic eow secge, ge me ne ge-
lyfaj);

68 Deab ic cow acsigc, ge ne and-

swariaj> mc, ne ne forlata|\

69 Hconon-forj) bi|> manncs suiui sit-
tcnde on Godcs ma'gnes swydran licalfe.

;

XXII. 54-69.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

423

54 Sothli thei takinge him, ledden to
the hous of the prince of prestis j Petre
forsothe suede him a fer.

55 Sothli a fyer kyndlid in the myddel
greet hous, and hem sittinge aboute,
Peter was in the myddel of hem.

56 Whom whanne sum handmayde
hadde seyn sittinge at the li3t, and
hadde biholde him, she seide. And this
was with him.

57 And he denyede him, seiynge,

Woraman, I knowe him not.

58 And aftir a litil a nothir man
seynge him, seide. And thou ert of
Petre forsothe seide, A ! man, I
hem.
am not.
59 And a space maad as of con our,
sothli anothir affermyde, seyinge, Treuli
and this was with him ; forwhi and he
is of Galilee.

60 And Petre seide, Man, I wot not
what thou seist. And a non 5it him
spekinge, a cok crew.

61 And the Lord turned a^en, biheeld
Petre ; and Petre hadde mynde of the
word of Jhesu, as he hadde seid, For
bifore that the koc crew, thries thou
Bchalt denye me.

62 And Petre gon forth, wepte bit-

turly.

6^ And the men that heelden him,

Bcornyden him betinge.

64 And thei veyliden ''^him, and smyten
his face, and axiden him, seyinge, Pro-
phesie thou, who is he that smoot thee.

65 Also

thei blasphemynge

seiden

raanye othere thingis a^ens him.

66 And as the day was maad, the
cldere men of the peple, and the princes
of prestis, and the scribis camen to
gidere, and ledden him in to her coun-
ceil, seyinge,

67 If thou art Crist, scic to vs. And
lie seide to hern, If I schal scye to 30U,
30 schulcn not bileuc to me

68 Sothli and if I shal axe, 3c schulen
not answere to mc, nether 30 schulen
leue.

69 Forsoth aftir this tyme mannis sonc
Bchal be sittinge on the ri3tlialf of the
vertu of God.

54 Then toke they hym, and ledde
hym and brought hym to the hye prestes
housse ; and Peter folowed a farre oflf.

55 When they had kyndled a fyre in
the myddes of the palys, and were sett
doune to gedder, Peter alsoo sate doune
a monge them.

56 And won off the wenches as he sate
beholde him by the light, and sett goode
eyesight on hym, and sayde. This same
was also with hym.

57 Then he denyed hym, sayinge, Wo-
man, I knowe hym nott.

58 And after a lytell whyle another
sawe hym, and sayde, Thou arte alsoo
off them. And Peter sayd, Man, I am
nott.

59 And aboute the space oJ0f an houre
after, another affirmed, sayinge, Verely
even this felowe was with hym ; for he
is off Galile.

60 Peter sayde, Man, I woote nott
And immediatly
what thou sayest.
whill he yett spake, the cocke ciewe.
61 And the Lorde tourned backe, and
loked apon Peter ; and Peter remem-
bred the wordes off the Lorde, howe
he sayde vnto hym. Before the cocke
crowe, thou shalt denye me thryse.

62 And Peter went out, and wepte

bitterly.

63 And the men that stode about

Jesus, mocked hym and smoote hym.

64 And blyndfolded hym, and smoote
his face, and axed hym, sayinge, Aredc,
who it is that smoote the 1

6^ And many other thynges despyt-

fully sayde they agayust hym.

66 And as sone as it was daye, the
seniours off the people, and the hy
prestes, and scrybes cam togedder, and
ledde hym into their counsell, sayinge,

67 Arte thou very Christ ?

vs.
And he sayde vnto them, If I shall
tell you, ye woU not beleve ;

tell

68 And if alsoo I axe you, ye will nott

answere me, nether Ictt me goo.

69 Here after shall the sonne of man
sit on the right hondc of the power of
God.

424

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

2
1
1

70 Da cwaedon h\g ealle, Eait tlil
Godes sunu] Da cwae}) be, Gc secgaj?
dajt ic eom.

7

And big cwsedon, Hwi gyrne we
gyt gemtnesse ] sylfe we gebyrdon of
bis mujje.

Chap. XXIIL

i Da aras call b}Ta

msenigeo, and Iseddon bine to Pilate.

2 And agunnou byne wre^^in, and
cwaedon, Disne we gemetton forbw}'rf-
ende ure |)eode, and forbeodende doet
man dam Casere gafol ne sealde, and
seg}) daet be sig Crist cyning.

3 Da acsode Pilatus bine, Eart dii
ludea cining? Da andswarode be, Dii
bit segst.

4 Da cwa?}) Pilatus to dam ealdruni,
and dam wercde, Ne finde ic nanue
intingan on dysum men.

5 Da blyddon big, and cwaedon. He
ast}Ta|) dis
ealle
ludeam, agyunende of Gal ilea od byder.

Iscrende

folc,

})urb

6 Da Pilatus gebyrde Galileam, be
acsode, bwaeder be wsere Galileisc man.

7 And da be gecneow da?t be wpps of
Herodes anwalde, be bine agen-sende
to Hcrode ; he wees on dam dagum on
Hierusalem.

8 Su|)lice Herodes fagnodc, dji be done
Haelend gcscab ; mycclre tide be wilnode
bine gcscon, fordam de be gebyrde my-
ccl be bim, and be bopode da?t be gcsawe
sum tacen de fram bim gewurde.

9 Da acsode be bine manegum wordum,

and be nabt ne andswarode.

10 Da stodou dara sacerda ealdras.

bine an-rsedlice wregende.

1

Da oferbogode Herodes bine mid
bis birede, and bysmrode bine gescrydne
luvitiim reafe, and bine agen-sende to
Pilate.

1

And on dam da^jrc Nvurdon Herodes

1

1

XXII. 70.-XXIIL 12.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

425

70 Therfore alle seiden, Therfore ert
Which seide,

thou the sone of God^
3e seyn for I am.

71 And thei seiden, What 5it desyren
A^e witnessing 1 forsoth we vs selue han
herd of his mouth.

,

70 Then sayde they all. Arte thou then
the Sonne of God? He sayd, Ye saye
that I am.

71 Then sayde they, What nede we
eny further witnes ? we oure selves have
herde off his awne mouthe.

Chap. XXIII.

i And al the mul-
titude risinge of hem, leddeu him to
Pilat.

2 Forsoth thei bigunnen to accuse him,
deyinge, We han founden this man turn-
ynge vpsodoun oure folk, and forbedinge
tributis to be 50uun to Cesar, and sey-
inge him silf to be Crist king.

3 Forsothe Pilat axide him, seyinge,
And he

Ert thou kyng of Jewis ?
answeringe seide, Thou seist.

4 Forsothe Pilat seide to the princes
of prestis, and to the cumpanyes of
peple, I fynde no thing of cause in
this man.

5 And thei woxen strengere, seyinge.
He moueth to gidere the peple, techinge
thorw al Judee, bigynnynge fro Galilee
til hidur,

6 Pilat forsoth heeringe Galilee axide,

if he were a man of Galilee.

7 And as he knew that he was of the
power of Eroude, he scnte him a^en to
Eroude ; which and he was at Jerusalem
in tho dayes.

8 Forsothe, him seyn, Eroude ioycde
fill myche ;
for he was coueitinge of
moche tyme to se him, for he lierde
many tliingis of hym, and hopide to sc
sum myracle to be don of him.

9 Sothli he axide him in manye wordis;

and lic no thing answcridc to him.

10 Forsothe the princes of prestis and
the scrybis stooden, stcdfastli accusingc
him.

1

Sothli Eroude with liis oost dispisidc
'him, and scornydc him clotliid with a

whit cloth, and sentc a3on to Pilate.

12 And Eroude and Pilate wcren maad

Chap. XXIII.

i And the whole
multitude of them arose, and ledde hym
vnto Pilate.

2 And they began to accuse hym, say-
inge. We have founde this felowe per-
vertynge the people, and forbiddynge
to paye tribute to Cesar, and sayetli
that he is Christ, a kynge.

3 And Pilate apposed him, saynge.
Arte thou the kynge of the lewes ^ He
answered him and sayde, Thou sayest.

4 Then sayde Pilate to the hye prestes,
and to the people, I fynde noo faute in
this man.

5 And they were the moore fearce, say-
inge. He mooveth the people, teachynge
thoroout all lewry, and began at Galile
even to this place.

6 When Pilate herde mencion off Ga-
lile, he axed whether the man were off
Galile.

7 And as sone as he kncwe that he
was of Herodes iurisdiccion, he sent
hym to Herode ; which was at that
tyme in Jerusalem alsoo.

8 When Herode sawe Jesus, he was
mervcliously gladdc ; for he was dc-
syrous to se hym off a longe season,
be cause he had hcarde many thyngcs
of hym, and trousted to have senc some
myracle done by hym.

9 Then questenncd he with hym of
many thyngcs ; but he answered hym
not won worde.

10 The hye prcstcs and scrybes stodc

forthc, and accused hym strailly.

1

And Herod with his men off warrc
dcspysetl hym, and mocked hym and
araycd hym in whyte, and sent hym
agayne to I 'i late.

12 And the same diiye

I'ilate and

426

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

and Pilatus gcfrynd ; s6|>lice big wacron
ser gefynd him bctweonau.

13 Da cw?ej) Pilatus to dara sacerda
caldruin and dugude caldruni afid to
dam folce,

14 Ge broliton me disne man, swylce
he dis folc for-hwyi'fde, and mi ! beforan
cow acsiendc ic nanne intingan findan
ne mseg on disum men, of dam dc ge
hine wrega]) j

15 Ne furdon Herodes, ic liine sende
agen to him, and him naht da'S-b'ces
deajjc gedon wa?s.

16 Ic hine gebetne forla'te.

17 Niede he sceolde him forgyfan

senne to hyra freols-d?ege.

18 Da hrymde call diet folc a^tgoederc,
and c\vae|>, Nim disne, and forgif us
Barrabban j

19 Se wass for sumere twy-r.T(lnesse

and man-slyhte on cwerteni ascnd.

20 Eft spa?c Pilatus to him, and wolde

forlsetan done Hselcnd.

21 Da hrymdon hig, and cwtedon, Alio})

hine, ahoj? hine.

22 Da cwfe|) he to him }iriddan side,
Hwset dyde des yfclcs i Ne gemette ic
nan )iing yfeles on dissum men da?t he
sig deaj^es scyklig ; ic hine J)reage, and
for-laete.

23 And hig astodon and mycelre stcfne
bacdon, drrt he wsere aliangcn ; and hyra
stcfna swidredon.

24

25 And he forgef him done, de wa^s
for man-slyhte and sumere sacc on
cwertcrne, done hi bccdon ; and done
Hsclcnd he sealde to hyra willan.

26 And da hig hine Ircddon, hi ge-
fengon sumne Cyrcniscne Simoncm, sc
com of dam tiine, and da rode him on
settou dset he hi baere aefter dam Ilacl-
cnde.

27 Him fylide mycel wered folccs, and

wifa da hine heofon, and weopon.

5
1

;

7

;

;

XXIII. I3-27-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

427

frendis in thilke day ; forwhi biforeto
tliei weren enemyes to gidere.

13 Sotbli the princes of prestis and
the magestratis of the peple clepid to
gidere,

14 Pilat seide to hem, 3^ han offrid
to me this man, as turnynge awey the
peple, and lo !
I axynge byfore 50U
fynde no cause in this man of thes
thingis, in whiche je accusen him

1

But nethir Eroude, for I a5ein sente
50U to him, and lo ! no thing worthi
of deeth is don to him.

16 Therfore I schal delyuere him a-

mended.

17 Forsothe he hadde nede to deliuere

to hem oon by the feeste day.

18 Sothli al the cumpanye criede, sei-
ynge. Do him a wey, and deliuere Bar-
abas to vs ;

19 Which was sent in to prison for
sum dissencioun maad in the citee, and
for mansleyng.

Herod wer made frendes togedder ; for
before they were at variaunce.

13 Pilate called to gedder the hye

prestes and rulers and the people,

14 And sayde vnto them, Ye have
brought this man vnto me, as won that
perverted the people, and loo !
I ex-
amined hym before you, and founde noo
this man off those thinges,
faute in
where of ye accuse hym

15 No nor yett Herode, for I sent
you to him, and lo ! noo thynge worthy
of deeth is done to him.

i6 I will therfore chasten hym, and

lett hym loosse.

1

For off necessite he must have letfc

one loosse vnto them at that feast.

18 And all the people cryed at once,
saynge, Awaye with him, and delivre
to vs Barrabas

19 Which for insurreccion made in
the cite, and morther, was cast into
preson.

20 Forsoth eft Pilat spak to hem, wil-

20 Pilate spake agayne to them, wil-

linge to delyuere Jhesu.

lynge to lett Jesus losse.

2

And thei vndircryeden, seyinge, Cru-

21 And they cryed, sayinge. Crucify

eifie, crucifie him.

22 Sothli the thridde tyme he seide to
hem, Sothli what of yuel hath he don ?
I fynde no cause of deeth in him ; ther-
fore I schal chastise hym, and I schal
delyuere.

23 And thei contynueden axinge with
greete voices, that he schulde be cruci-
fied ; and the voyces of hem woxen
stronge.

24 And Pilat demyde her axinge to

be don.

25 Sothli he dcliucrede to hem him,
for manslcynge and dissencioun
that
prisoun, whom thei
was sent in
axidcn ; sothli he bitook Jhesu to her
wille.

to

26 And whanne thei Icddcn him, thei
took sum man, Symount of Sirenon,
comynge fro the toun, and thei puttiden
to him a cro.ss to berc aftir Jhesu.

hym, crucify hym.

22 He sayde vnto them the thyrde
tyme. What harme hath he done'?
I
fynde noo cause off deeth in hym ; I
will therrore chasten hym, and lett hym
goo losse.

23 And they cryed with loude voyce,
and requyred that he myght be cruci-
fyed; and the cryinge off the hye prestes
prevayled.

24 And Pilate gave sentence that it

shulde be as they requyred.

25 And lett losse vnto them hym, that
for insurreccion and morther was cast
into preson, whom they desyred ; and
delyvercd Jesus to do with hym what
they wolde.

26 And as they leddc hym awaye, they
caught won, Simon of Sirene, commyngo
out of the fclde, and on hym layde they
the crossc to bcaro it after Jesus.

27 Sothli thcr suede him mochc cum-
panye of pfplc, and of wyninien that
weiledcn, and l^ymoornydcu him.

27 There folowcd hym a greate com-
pany of people, and of wemen, which
women bcwaylcd, and lamented hym.

428

GOTUIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

28 Da cwfc)) se Hselend bewend, Eala
dohtra Hiemsalem, nelle ge ofer me
wcpan, ac wepaj) ofer eow sylfe, and
ofer eowre beam.

29 Fordam da dagas cumaj), on dam
liig cweda)), Eadige synd da untymcnd-
an, and innodas de ne cendon, and
da breost de ne sicton.

30 Donne af^nina|> big cwedan to dam
muntum, Feallaj? ofer us, and to beorgum,
Ofer-wreo)) us.

31 Fordam gif big on grenum trcowe
due ]}ing do]), bwaet do)? big on dam
drigum 1

32 And mid bim wseron

gelaeddc
twegen odre raanfulle, doet big waeron
ofslegene.
33 And syddan big comon on da stowe,
de is genemned Caluarie, da?t is, Heafod-
pannan stow, dar big bine bengon, and
anne sceajjan on his swidran bealfe, and
odcrne on bis wynstran.
34 Da cWitJ) se Il'delend, Faedcr, forgif
bim, fordam big nyton bwa?t big d6]>.
S6|)lice big dseldon hys reaf, and wurpon
blotu.

35 And daet folc stod ge-anbidiende ;
and da caldras bine t85kU)n mid liim,
and cwtvdon, O'dre be gebaclde ; gebaele
be bine sylfne, gif be sig Godes ge-
corcna.

36 And da cempan bine bysmredon,

and liim eccd brobton,
37 And dus cwredon, Gif du si ludea
cyning, gedo de biibie.

38 Da wses bis ofer-gcwrit ofer bine
. and Ebre-

awriten Greciscum stafum, .
iscum, DIS IS lUDEA CINING.

.

39 An of dam scea})um de mid bim
bangodc, bine gremede, and cwa')^, Gif
dii Crist cart, gebscl de sylfne and unc.

40 Dd andswarode se oder, and bine
I'rcadc, and cwa^j), Ne du God ne on-
(b-irtst, d;rt dii cart on dare ylcan ge-
nyderunge 1

41 And vryt witodlice be unccr ?pr-
d;v(hmi onfoj) ; B6j>b'ce des nalit yfcles
ne dyde.

;

XXIII. 28-41.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

429

28 Sothli Jhesu turnyd to hem seide,
Dou3tris of Jerusalem, uyle 36 wepe on
me, but wepe 3e on 30U silf, and on
5oure sones.

29 For lo ! dayes schulen come, in
whiche it sclial be seid, Blessid be bareyn
wymmen, and wombis that ban not
gendrid, and the teetis whiche ban not
jouun souke.

30 Thanne thei schulen bigynne to
seye to monteyns, Falle 3e doun on vs,
and to litle hillis, Hile 3e vs.

31 For if thei don thes thingis in a
grene tree, what schal be don in a drye?

28 Jesus turned backe vnto them and
sayde, Doughters of Jerusalem, wepe not
for me, but wepe for youre selves, and
for youre children.

29 For marke ! the dayes will come,
when men shall saye, Happy are the
baren, and the wombes that never bare,
and the pappes which never gave sucke.

30 Then shall they begyn to saye to
the mountaynes, Fall on vs, and to the
hilles. Cover vs.

31 For yf they do this to a grene tree,

what shalbe done to the drye 1

32 Sothli and othere tweye wickide
men weren led with him, that thei
schulde be slayn.

33 And aftir that thei camen in to a
place, which is clepid of Caluarie, there
thei cinicifieden him, and the theues,
oon on the ri3thalf, and the tother on
the left half.

departinge

Forsothe thei

34 Forsothe Jhesu seide, Fadir, for3yue
to hem, for thei witen not what thei
don.
his
clothis, senten lottis.
35 And the peple stood abydinge ;
and the princes scornyden him with
hem, seyinge, Othere men he made saf
make he him silf
if he is Crist,
the chosun of God.

saf,

36 Forsoth and kny3tis nei3ynge scorn-

yden him, and offriden vynegre to him,

37 Seyinge, If thou ert kyng of Jewis,

make thee saf

38 Sothli and the wrytinge aboue was
writun on him with lettris of Greek, of
Latyn, and of Ebrew, This is the kyng
of Jewis.

39 Forsoth oon of tho theues that
hangiden, blasphemyde him. seyinge. If
Cri.st, make tlii silf saf and
thou ci-t

vs.

40 Sothli the tothir answeringc,blamydc
liim, soyinge, Netliir thou drcdist God,
that thou art in the same dampnacioun 1

41 And trculy wc iustly, for we ban
n'ccyucd wortlii thingiH to dcdis ; sotlili
this hath don no yuel.

32 There were two evyll doers ledde

with hym to be slayne.

33 And when they wer come to the
place, which is called Calvary, there they
crucifyed hym, and the evyll doars, one
on the right honde, and the other on
the lefte honde.

34 Then sayde Jesus, Father, forgeve
them, for they woot not what they do.
And they parted his rayment, and cast
loottes.

35 And the people stode and behelde
and the rulers mocked hym with them,
saying. He holpe other men ; Ictt hym
helpe hym silfe, yf he be Christ, the
chosen of God.

36 The soudiers alsoo mocked hym,

and cam and gave hym veneger,
37 And sayde, Yf thou be that kynge
off the lewes, save thy silfe.

38 His superscripcion was written over
him in Greke, Latin, and Ebrue letters,
This is the kynge off the lewes.

39 The one off the malefactours which
hanged, rayled on hym, sayingc, Yf thou
be Christ, save thy silfe and vs.

40 The other answered, and rebuked
hym, .suyiiigc, Nctlier fcarest thou iUnl,
])ccause thou arte in the same damnu-
cion 1
41 Wc arc righteously punncsshed, for
we reccave accordynge to oure dcdcs ;
l)utt this man hath done noo thyngo
amyssc.

430

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

42 And he cwre}? to clam Iljvlendc,
Drihten, gemun dii me, doune du cymst
on din rice.
43 Da cwcT]) se Haelend to him, ....
to-da?g dii List mid me on paradiso.

44 Da wpes nean sco syxte tid, and
jiystro waeron ofer ealle eorj'an od da
nigojjan tide.

45 And sunne wpps a)>ystrod, and das
temples wah-ryft wear}) tosh ten on mid-
dan.

46 Da cwn?])

se Hselcnd, clypiende
myceh-e stefnc, Fredcr, ic bcbeodc minne
gast on dine handa. And dus cwedende,
he forjj-fcrde.
47 Da se hundred-man gcseali d;vt dar
geworden wses, he God wuldrode, and
cw?e)), Sojjhce des man woes rihtwis.

48 And eall wered de a^t disse wa^fer-
synue wa?ron, and gesfiwon da })ing de
gewurdon, wseron agen geweude, and
hyra breost beoton.

49 Da stodon ealle hys cudan fcorran,
and da wif de liim fyligdon fram Galilea,
das jjing geseonde.

50 And d;i an man, on naman loscp,

se W£ES gerefa, god wer and rihtwis,

51 (Des ne ge})Wcerode hyra gcjioahte
and hyra dsedum ;) fram Arimathia, lu-
dea ceastre ; se sylfa ge-anbidode Godes
rice.

52 Des genealaehte to Pilate, and bfed

does Htclendes lichaman.

53 And nyder-iileile hyne, and on scytan
befcold, and ledc hine on liheawcne byrg-
ene, on daere njes da gyt nsenig aled.

54 And da wajs se da^g parasccue, dat
is gegearwimge, and sjeter-docg onlyhtc.

55 Da wif de him fyligdon, de comon
mid him of Galilea, big gcsawon da
bjTgene, and hu his h'chama aled wees.

56 And big cyrdon, and gearwedon
wyrt-gcmang, and sealfa ; and on sa?ter-
daeg big gestildon, aefter bebode.

XXIII. 42-56.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

431

42 And lie seide to Jhesu, Lord, haue
mynde on me, wlianne thou schalt come
in to thi kingrdom.
43 And Jhesu seyde to him, Treuli I
seie to thee, this day thou schalt be with
me in paradys.

44 Sothly it was almost the sixte our,
and derknessis weren maad in al erthe
til to the nynthe our.

45 And the sunne was maad derk, and
the veyl of the temple was kitt the
myddel.

46 And Jhesu cryinge with greet voys,
seide, Fadir, in to thi hondis I bitake
my spirit. And he seyinge thes thingis,
sente out the spirit. "f"

47 Forsothe centurio seynge the thing
that was don, glorifiede God, seyinge,
Verily tliis man .was iust.

48 And al the cumpany of hem that
weren there to gidere at this spectacle,
and sy5en tho thingis that weren don,
smytinge her brestis turneden a5eyn.

49 Forsoth al his knowen stooden a fer,
and wymmen that sueden him fro Gali-
lee, seynge thes thingis.

50 And lo ! a man, Joseph bi name,
that was a decurioun,^ a good man and
iust, of Aramathie, a citee of Judee,

51 He consentide not to the counccil
and dedis of hem ; which and he abood
the kingdom of God.

52 ITc cam ny3 to Pilat, and axide the

body of Jhesu,

53 And wlappidc it don doun in a
lynnen cloth, and puttide him in a
graue hcwun, in which not 3it ony man
was put.

54 And the day was the makingc
redy of pask, and the saboth bygan to
schync.
55 Sothli the wymmen suyngc, that
camen with him fro Galileo, sy^cn the
graue, and hou his body was put.

56 And thci tuniyngc a^on, madcn
redy swctc spices, and oync inonti.s ; and
sothli in the saboth thci restiden, vp the
comaundcmcnt.

42 And he sayde vnto Jesus, Lorde,
remember me, when thou commest into
thy kyngdom.

43 And Jesus saiyde vnto hym, Verely
I saye vnto the, to daye shalt thou be
with me in paradise.

44 And it was about the sixt houre,
and there cam a darcknes over all the
londe vntyll the nynth houre.

45 And the sonne was darckened, and
the vayle of the temple rent even thorow
the myddes.

46 And Jesus cryed with a greate voyce,
and sayd. Father, into thy hondes I
commende my sprete. And when he
thus had sayd, he gave vp the goost.
47 When the centurion sawe what had
happened, he glorified God, sayinge, Of
a surtie this man was perfecte.

48 And all the people that cam to
gedder to that sight, beholdynge the
thinges which were done, smoote their
brestes, and returned home.

49 All hys acquayntaunce stode a farre
of, and the wemen which folowed hym
from Galile, beholdynge these thynges.

50 And beholde ! there was a man,
named Joseph, a senatour, which was
a goode man and a iuste,

51 (He did nott consent to their coun-
sell and dede ;) which was of Aramathia,
a cite off the lewes ; which same alsoo
wayted for the kyngdom off God.

52 He went vnto Pylate, and begged

the boddy of Jesus,

53 And toke it doune and wrapped
it in a lynnen clooth, and layed it in
an heawen toumbe, wherin was never
man before layed.

54 And that daye was the saboth even,

and the saboth drue on.

55 The wcmcn that folowed after,
whych cam with hym from Galile, be-
holde the scpulcrc, and liowc hys body
was layed.

56 And returned, and prepared swctc
odouros, and oyntincntes ; and the sa-
both daye they rested, accordyngc to
the coniniaundcincnt.

432

GOTHIC, 360.

4
1

[St. Luke

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
Chap. XXIV. i On anum reste-drege
swyde ser on dseg-red liig comon to clit'ie
byrgene, and bscron mid Lira da wyrt-
gemang, cle Li gegearwedon

2 And liig gemetton done stan awyltnc

of dsere byrgene.

3 And dd hi in to dsere bjTgene eodon,
hig ne gemetton na dses IIiElcndes lich-
aman.

4 And da waes geworden, dd big on
mode afaerede waeron be dissum, da
stodon twefjen weras wid biff on bwituni
reafe.

5 And da hig adredon, and hyra and-
wlitan on eor|)an hyldon, hig cwacdon
to him, Hwi sece ge lybbendue mid
deadum 1

6 Nis he her, ac he aras.

Ge})cncaj>,
hu he spree wid eow, da g}'t dd Ije wivs
on Galilea,

7 And cw8e|>, Da?t mannes sunu bi|)
geseald on handa synfidra manna, and
beon dhangen, and dy })riddan da^ge
arisan.

8 And hifj ijemundon his worda.
9 And hig geweudon fram da^re byrg-
ene, and cyddon eall dis dam endhif-
enum, and eallum odrum.

10 S6|ilice wa^s Maria Magdalene, and
lohanna, and ^laria lacobi, and odre dc
mid him wseron, da sacdon dds |>ing
dam apostolum.

1

And dis word wacron ge|>idite be-
foran him swa woffung, and hig ne ge-
lyfdon him.

12 Dd aras Petrus, and am to daM'e
byrgene ; and ahitende, he geseah da
And lie ferde,
lin-Wtcda sylfe alede.
wundrigende da?3 dar geworden wa^s.^

13 And da ferdon twcgcn of liim on
da^t castel, da^t wa?s on fa^ce syxtig fur-
langa fram Hierusalem, on naman Em-
aus.

And big sprccon him bctweonan be

1

eallum dam de dar gcwordcne wseron.

15 And da hig spelledon, and mid him
smcadon, se Haelcnd gcncalselite and
ferdc mid him.

16 S6|>lice liyra eagan wjcron forluTfde,

da't hig bine ne gecncowon.

!

3
1

XXIV. i-i6.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

433

Chap. XXIV.

i Forsothe in oon of
the woke ful erly thei camen to tlie
graue, bryngynge swete spicis, wliiche
tliei hadden maad redy, ....

2 And thei founden the stoone turned

a wey fro the graue.

3 And thei gon yn, founden not the

body of Jhesu.

Chap. XXIV. i On the morowe after
the saboth erly in the mornynge they
cam vnto the toumbe, and brought the
odoures whych they had prepared, and
other wemen wyth them.

2 And they founde the stone rouled

awaye from the sepulcre.

3 And went in, and founde nott the

body off the Lorde Jesu.

4 And it was don, while thei weren

astoneyed in thou3t of this thing, loo
twey men stooden bisydis hem in cloth
schynynge.

5 Sothli whenne thei dredden, and
bowiden her semelant in to erthe, thei
seiden to hem, What seke ^e the lyuynge
with deede men 1

6 He is not here, but he hath rise.
Haue 5e mynde, how he spak to 50U,
whanne 5it he was in Galilee,

7 Seyinge, For it bihoueth mannis sone
be bitakun in to hondis of synful men,
and to be crucified, and the thridde day
to ryse a3en.

8 And thei bithou3ten on his wordis.
9 And thei gon a3en fro the graue,
telden alle thes thingis to the enleueiie,
and to alle othere.

I o Forsothe Mary Mawdeleyn was, and
Joone, and Marye of James, and othere
wymmen that weren with hem, that
seiden thes thingis to apostlis.

I I And thes wordis weren seyn bifore
hem as madnesse/ and thei bileueden
not to hem.

12 Forsothe Pctre rysingc, ran to the
gruue ; and he bowynge doun, sy3 the
And he
lyniien
weiite, woridrynge with him silf this
thing that was don,

put aloone.

clothis

13 And lo ! tweyne of hem wcntcn in
that day to a castel, that was fro Jeru-
salem in space of sixty furlongis, l)y
name Emaws.

14 And thoi Hpiikcn to giderc of alio

thes thingis that luiddcn fallo.

15 And it was don, while tliei talkiden,
and .sou3ten with hem silf, and Jhesu
him silf nei3yngc, wcnte with hem.

4 And it happened, as they were amased
ther at, loo ! two men stode by them
in shynynge vestures.

5 As they were a fraide, and bowed
doune their faces to the erth, they sayd
to them, Why seke ye the livynge a-
monge the deed 1

6 He is nott here, but is rysen.

Ee-
member, howe he spake vnto you, when
he was yett with you in Galile,

7 Sayinge, That the sonne off man
must be delivered into the hondes off
synfuU men, and be crucified, and the
thyrde daye ryse agayne.

8 And they remembred his wordes.
9 And returned from the sepulcre, and
tolde all these thynges vnto the eleven,
and to all other.

10 Hytt was Mary Magdalen, and
Joanna, and Mary Jacoby, and other
that were with them, whych tolde these
thynges vnto the apostles.

1

And their wordes semed vnto them
beleved they

fayned thynges, nether
them.

12 Then aroose Peter, and ran vnto
the sepulcre ; and stouped in, and sawe
the lynnen cloothes layde by them sylfe.
And departed, wondrynge in hym sylfo
att thatt whych hadd happened.

1

And beholde ! two of them went
that same daye to a toune, whych was
from Jerusalem about tine scoore for-
longes, called Emaus.

14 And they tulkcd togedder of all

thingcs which had happened.

15 And it chaunscd, as they commcned
togedder, and reuHoned, that Jesus liym
silfe druc neare, and went with them.

t6 Sothli her y3cn wcrcn holdun, lest

16 ]jut their eyes were holden, that

thei knewcn him.

they couldc nott knowc hym.

F f

434

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

1

;

17 And he cw3e)> to him, Hwiut syiul
da spaeca, de gyt recceaj) inc betweonan
gangende, and synd unrotc 1

18 Da andswarode him an, does nama
wses Cleofas, and cwaej), Eart dii ana
forwrecen on Hierusalem, and nystcst
dii da |>ing, de on byre gewordene synd
on dysum dagum 1

19 He sscde da, Hwset synd da J'ing]
And hig sscdon, Be dam Nazareniscan
Hselende, se waes wer and witega, mihtig
on spjvce and on weorce beforan Gode
and eallum folce ;

20 And hit bine sealdon da heah-saeer-
das and ure ealdras on dea})es genyder-
unge, and iihengon bine.

2

We hopedon, da^t be to alysenne
waere Israhel. And mi is se |>ridda da?g
to-daeg, daet dys wses geworden.

2 2 And eac sume wif of urum us breg-
don, da weeron ser leohte at d?ere b}Tg-
ene

23 And na his licbaman gemetton, liig
comon, and sacdon, diet big gesawon
engla gesibjje, da secga}^, bine lybban.

24 And da ferdon sume of ilrum to
daere bergenc, and swa gemetton swa
da wif saedon, bine hig ne gesawon.

25 Da cwsej) se Haelend to him, Eala !
dysegan, and on beortan laete to gelyf-
enne eallum dam de witegan spaecon.

26 Hii ne gebyrede Criste das |)ing

jjolian, and swa on his wuldor gan 1

27 And .... be rebte him of Moyse
and of eallum haligum gewritum, de
be him awritene waeron.

28 And big genealsebton dam castele,
de big to ferdon. And be dyde swylce
he fyr fa ran wolde.

29 And big nyddon bine, and cwacdon,
Wuna mid unc, fordam de hit aefen-
iaec|i, and se da?g wtes abyld. And be
In-eode dast he mid him ^^-uuode.

30

And da he mid him sajt, be

7

;

9

;

;

XXIV. 17-30.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

1

And be seide to hem, Whiche ben
thes wordis, tbat ^e speken to gidere
goynge, and 56 ben sorwful 1

18 And oon answerlnge, to whom the
name was Cleofas, seide to him, Thou
aloone ert a pilgrym of Jerusalem, and
hast thou not knowe, what thingis ben
don in it in thes dayes ?

19 To which he seide, Whiche] And
thei seyden to him. Of Jhesu of Naza-
reth, that was a man prophete, my3ti in
work and word bifore God and al the
peple

20 And hou the hi5este prestis and
oure princes bitoken him in to dampna-
cioun of deeth, and crucifieden him.

21 Forsoth we hopiden, for he scliulde
a5en bye Israel. And now in alle thingis
the thridde day is to day, that thes
thingis ben don.

22 But and sum wymmen of oure
maden vs a ferd, whiche bifore the li3t
weren at the graue ;

23 And his bodi not foundun, thei
camen, seyinge, that thei sy5en a si3t of
aungels, whiche seyn, that he lyueth.

24 And sum men of oure wenten to
the graue, and thei founden so as the
wymmen seiden, but thei founden not
him.

25 And he seydfe to hem, A! foolis,
and slowc of herte for to bileue in alle
thingis whiche the prophetis han spoke.
26 Where it bihofte not Crist to suffre
thes thingis, and so for to cntrc in to
his glorie 1

27 And lie big}'7inynge at Moyses and
alle prophetis, cxpownede to hem in alle
scripturis, whiche weren of him.

28 And thei camcn ny3 to the castel,
And he made

whidur thei wenten.
cuntonauncc him to go fortlicrc.

29 And thei constreyncdc'n liim, sey-
inge, Dwcl witli VK, for it dniwith to
ny3t, and the day is now bowid «loun.
And he cntridc with hem

30 And it was don, wliilc he rcstldc

TYNDALE,i526.

435
17 And he sayde vnto them. What
maner of communicacions are
these,
that ye have one to another as ye walke,
and are sadde 1

18 And the one off them, named Cle-
ophas, answered and sayd vnto hym,
Arte thou only a straunger in Jerusalem,
and haste nott knowen the thingfes, which
have chaunsed therin in these dayes 1

1

To whom he sayd, What thynges 1
And they sayd vnto hym. Of Jesus of
Nazareth, which was a prophet, myghty
in dede and worde before God and all
the people

20 And howe the hye prestes and oure
ruelers delivered hym to be condempned
to deeth, and have crucified hym.

21 We trusted, that it shulde have
bene he that
shulde have delivered
And as touchynge all these
Israheil.
thynges to daye is even the thyi-d daye,
that they were done.

22 Ye and certayne wemen alsoo of
oure company made vs astonyed, whych
cam erly vnto the sepulcre

23 And founde nott his boddy, and
cam, sayinge, that they had sene visions
off angels, which sayde, that he was
alive.

24 And certayne of them which were
with vs went their waye to the sepulcre,
and founde ytt even soo as the wemen
had sayde, but hym they sawe nott.

25 And he sayde vnto them,

! foles,
and si owe of herte to beleve all that the
prophetcs have spoken.

26 Oujjht not Christ to have suffered
these thinges, and to enter into his
glory 1

27 And he began at Moses and at all
the prophetcs, and interpreted vnto them
in all scriptures, which were written of
him.

28 And they drue neye vnto the tounc,
which they went to. And he made as
though he wohlc have gone further.

29 And [they] constrayned hym, say-
inge, Abyde with vs,
it drawetli
tawardcs nyght, and the daye is faire
And he went in to tary with
])aH.scd.
them.

for

30 And it cam to passe, as lie sate att

V f 2

43IJ

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

onfeng hlnf, and hine blotsode, and
bntc, and him ra-hte.

31 Da wurdon liyra eagan ge-openode,
and liig gecneowon hine ; and he gewat
frara him.

32 And hig cwccdon him hehvynan,
Nies uncer heorte byrnende, da he on
wege wid unc spsec, and unc halige ge-
writu ontynde 1

33 And hig arison on diere ylean tide,
and wendon to Hierusalem, and ge-
metton eudlufan gegaderode, and da de
mid him wa-ron,

34 And cweedon, Doet Drihten su])lice
aras, and Simone aet-ywde.

35 And hig rehton da j)ing da de on
wege gewordene waeron, and hu hig hine
oncneowon on hlafes brice.^

36 S6[)lice da hig dis

spraecon, se
Htelend stod on hyra midlene, and seede
him, Sib ay eow ;
ic hit com, nc on-
drscde ge eow.
37 Da Wccron hig gedrefede and a-
faerede, and hig wendon da't hig gast
gesawon.

38 And he ssede him, Hwi synd ge ge-
drefede, and gejjancas on cowre heortan
astiga)? 1

39 Geseoj) mine handa and mine fet,
Gmi)iaj), and ge-
daet ic sylf hit eom.
seoj) ; dcet gast nsef}^ flsesc, and ban, swa
ge gescoj) me habban.

40 Antl da he dis sacde, he a}t-eowde

him fet and handa.

41 Da cwa^)> he to him, da hig da gyt
ne gclyfdon, and for gefean wundredon,
Ha^bbe ge her acnig })ing to etiinne ]

42 And liigbrohton him dael gcbrteddes

fisces, and beo-breiid.

43 And da he aet beforan him, he nam

da hifa, and him seakle.

44 And cwa?!? to him, Dis synd da
word de ic spaec to eow, da ic waes da
gyt mid eow ; fordam de liit
is ncod
da'tbeon ealle })inggefyllede, de awritene
synd on Moyses ap, and on witegum, and
on seahnum, be me.

45 Da ontynde he him andgyt, da}t

hig ongcton hrdige gewritu.

46 And he cwa')> to him, Daet dus is

1

XXIV. 31-46.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

437

with hem, he took bred, and blesside,
and brae, and dresside to hem.

31 And the y^en of hem weren opened,
and thei knewen him ; and he vanysch-
ide fro her y5en.

32 And thei seiden to gidere, Wher
cure herte was not brennynge in vs,
while he spac in the weye, and openyde
scripturis to vs 1

33 And thei risinge in the same our,
wenten a5en in to Jerusalem, and thei
founden enleue gederid to gidere, and
hem that weren with hem,

34 Seyinge, For the Lord roos verily,

and aperide to Symount.

35 And thei telden what thingis weren
don in the weye, and liou thei knewen
him in brekynge of breed.

36 Forsothe while thei spaken thes
thingis, Jhesus stood in the myddel of
hem, and seide to hem, Pees to 50U ; I
am, nyle ^e drede.

37 Sothli thei troublid and agast, gess-

iilen hem to se a spirit.

38 And he seide to hem, What ben 56
troublid, and thou3tis sty3en vp in to
50ure hertis ?
39 Se 5e myn hondis and my feet, for
I my silf am. Feele 50, and se 3e ; for a
spirit hath not fleisch, and boonys,. as ^e
seen me for to haue.

40 And whanne he hadde seyd this
thing, he schewide hondis and feet to
hem.

4

Forsoth 5it hem not bileuynge, and
wondringe for ioye, he seyde, Han 5e
ony thing here tliat schal be etun ?

42 And thei offriden to him a part of

a fysch roostid, and a cooml> of hony.

43 And whanne he hadde etun bifore
hem, he takyiigc the relyfs, ^af to liem.

44 And he seyde to hem, Tlics lien the
wordis whiche I spak to 30U, whanne I
for it is ncdc that
was 3it with 30U ;
alle tliingis be fillid, whiche Ijcu writun
in the lawe of Moyscs, and in prophctis,
and in salmes, of me.

45 'J'lianne he opcnyd witt to hem, that

thei Hcliulde vndirstondc scripturis.

46 And he scydc to hem, For tlius it

meate wyth them, he toke breed, and
blessed yt, and brake ytt, and gave it
vnto them.

31 And their eyes were openned, and
they knewe hym j and he vannisshed
out of their syght.

32 And they sayde bitwene them selves.
Did not oure hertes burne wyth in vs,
whyll he talked with vs by the waye,
and openned to vs the scriptures ?

33 And they roose vp the same houre,
and returned agayne to Jerusalem, and
they founde the eleven gaddered to
gedder, and them that were wyth them,
34 Sayinge, The Lorde is risen in dede,

and hath apered to Simon.

35 And they tolde what was done in
the waye, and howe they knewe hym by
the breakynge off breed.

36 As they thus spake, Jesus hym silfe
stode in the myddes of them, and sayde
vnto them, Peace be mth you

37 And they were abasshed and afrayde,
supposinge that they had sene a sprete.

38 And he sayde vnto them. Why are
ye troubled, and why do thoughtes aryse
in youre hertes ?
39 Beholde my hondes and my fete,
for it ys even I my sylfe.
Handle me,
and se ; for spretes have nott flesshe,
and bones, as ye se me have.

40 And when he had thus spoken, he

shewed them his hondes and his fete.

41 And whyll they yett beleved nott
for ioye, and wondred, he sayde vnto
them. Have ye here eny meate 1

42 And they gave hym a pcce of a

brouled fisshe, and of an hony combe.

43 And he toke it, and ate it before
them

44 And he sayde vnto them, These arc
the wordes which I spake vnto you,
wliill I was yi'tt with you ;
that all
must be fullillcd, which were written of
me in the lawe of Moses, and in tlic
pro])h('t<'S, and in the jwulmcs.

45 Then openned lie their wyttoH, that

thoy myght vnderstond tlie scriptures.

46 And sayde vnto tlioni, Thus ys yt

438

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Luke

awriten, and dus gebyrede Criste jjolian,
and dy jiriddan daege of deajjc ai isan ;

47 And beon bodod on his naman
dacd-bote and synna forgyfenesse on
ealle |)e6da, agynnendum fram Hieru-
salem.

48 S6j)lice ge synd J'inga gcwitan.

49 And ic sende on eow mines focdcr
sittc ge on ceastrc, od ge syn

behat ;
ufene gescrydde.

50 S6|)lice he gelsedde big ut on Ecth-
aniam, and he bletsode big, his handuni
up-ahafenum.

5 r And hit waes geworden, da he blet-
sode big, he ferde fram him, and wa?s
fered on heofen.

52 And big gebiddende big gcbwurfon

on Hierusalem mid mycelum gefean ;
53 And big waeron sjTiile on dam
temple, God borigeude, and bync cac
bletsigende. Amen.

;

;

^ XXIV. 47-53.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

439

is writun, and thus it bihofte Crist to
suffre, and to ryse a3en fro deed men in
the thridde day
47 And penaunee and remyssioun of
synnes to be prechid in his name to alle
folkis, men bigynnynge at Jerusalem.

48 Forsothe 56 ben witnessis of thes

thingis.
49 And I sende the biheeste of my
sothli sitte ^e in the
fadir in to 50U ;
citee, til that ^e be clothid with vertu
fro an hi^.

50 Forsoth he ledde hem forth in to
Bethanye, and, his hondis reysid, he
blesside hem.

51 And it was don, while he blesside
hem, he departide fro hem, and was
borun in to heuene.

52 And thei worshippinge wente a^en

in to -Jerusalem with greet ioye
53 And weren euere in the temple,
heryinge and blessinge God.

written, and thus it behoved Christ to
suffre, and to ryse agayne from death
the thyrde daye ;

47 And that repentaunce and remission
of synnes shulde be preached in his
name amonge all nacions, and the be-
gynnynge must be at Jerusalem.

48 And ye are witnesses

of these

thynges.

49 And beholde, I wyll sende the pro-
mes of my father apon you ; butt tary
ye in the cite of Jerusalen, vntill ye be
sndewed with power from an hye.

50 And he ledde them out into Beth-
any, and lifte vp hys hondes, and blest
them.

51 And it cam to passe, as he blessed
them, he departed from them, and was
caryed vp in to heven.

52 And they worshipped hym and re-

turned to Jerusalem with greate ioye ;

53 And were continually in the temple,

praysynge and laudinge God.

1

;

;

AIWAGGELYO

PAIRH

lOHANNEN.

HER ONGINNEp

BJET GODSPELL

^FTER

lOHANNES GERECEDNESSE.

CiiAP. I.

I On fruniaa^ wa?s word,
and diet word waes mid Gode, and God
wa3S cla3t word.

2 Doet waes on finiman mid Gode.

3 Ealle ))ing waeron gcworlite |>urli
hyne, and nan ]jing nces gewurlit biltan
Lim.

4 Diet wrcs lif de on him geworht waes,

and dset lif wa3S manna leolit

5 And daet leoht lyht on )>ystrum, and

J^ystro daet ne gcnamon.

6 Man wxs fram Gode asend, dais

nama waes lohannes.

7 Des com to gewitnessc, da^t he ge-
witnessc cydde be dam Icohte, dait calle
men J>urh hyne gelytdon.

8 Naes lie leolit, ac d;\;t he ircwitncssc

for|)-l)sere be dam Icohte.

9 S6|) leoht waes, dset onlyht aelcne

cumcndnc man on disne middan-card.

10 He wics on niiddan-eardc, and mid-
dan-eard waes geworht J)urh hiue, and
middan-card liine nc gccncow.

1

To his ageumn he com, and liig

hyne ne underfengon.

12 S6j)Hce swii liwylcc swa hyne under-
fengon, he scaldc him anweald da^t liig
waeron Godcs beam, dam de gclyfa]) on
his naman

13 Da ne S}nd acennede of blodum,
ne of flaesces willan, ne of wercs wilhiii,
ac hig synd of Gode acennede.

14 And da^t word w.ts flitsc gcwordcn,
and cardode on us, and we gesawon hys
wuldor, swylce an-cennedes wuldor of

1

;

1

;

HEEEE BIGTNNETH

THE GOSPEL

OF

J

N.

THE GOSPELL

OFF

SANCTE JHON.

Chap. I.

i In the bigynnynge was
the word,^ and the word was at God,
and God was the word.

2 This was in the bigynnynge at God.

Chap. I.

i In the b^ynnynge was
that worde, and that worde was with
God, and God was thatt worde.

2 The same was in the begynnynge

wyth God.

3 Alle thingis ben maad by hym, and
with outen him is maad no3t, that thing
that is maad.

3 All thynges were made by it, and
with out it was made noo thinge, that
made was.

4 "Was lyf in him, and the lyf was the

li3t of men

5 And the li3t schyneth in derknessis,

and derknessis tooken not it.
6 A man was sent fro God, to whom
the name was Joon.

7 This man cam in to witnessinge,
that he schulde here witnessinjje of the
li3t, that alle men schulden bileue bi
him.

8 He was not the H3t, but that he

4 In it was lyfe, and lyfe was the light

of men

5 And the light shyneth in darcknes,

and darcknes comprehended it not.

6 There was a man sent from God,

whose name was Jhon.

7 The same cam as a witnes, to beare
witnes of the light, that all men through
him myght beleve.

8 He was nott that light, but to beare

schulde here witness ng of the li3t.

witnes of the light.

9 It was verri li3t, wliich H3tneth ech

man comynge into this world.

10 He was in the world, and the world
was maad bi him, and the world knew
him not.

1

He cam in to his owne thingis, and

hise rcceyuedcn not him.

12 Forsothe hou manye euere re-
ccyueden him, he 3af to hem power for
to be maad the sones of God, to hem
that bileuon in his name ;

13 Wliiclio not of lilodis, nether of the
will of fleisch, nether of the will of man,
but ben born of God.

14 And the word^ is maad fleisch,^ and
hath dwell id in vs, and we han scyn the
gloric of him, the glorie as of the oon

9 That was a true light, which lighten-

eth all men that come into the worldc.

10 He was in the worlde, and the
worlde by him was made, and the worlde
knewe hym not.

,,.

1

He cam into his awnc, and his

receaved him not.

12 Vnto as meny as receaved him,
gave he power to be the sonncs of God,
in that they belevcd on his name ;

13 Which were borne not of bloudc,
nor of the will of the flesshc, nor yet of
the will of inen, but of God.

14 Aim! thiit worde was made flesshc,
and dwelt amongc vs, and we sawc the
glory off yt, as the glory off the only

442

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

9

;

;

fictlcr, diet waes ful mid gifc, and scjjfiost-
nesse.^

15 loliannes cyj? gcwitncsse be him,
and clypa|>, dus cwedende, J)es wa's, de
ic saede, Se de to cumcnne is jvfter me,
wses geworden beforan me, fordam lie
waes ser donne ic

16 And of his gefyllednesse we callc

onfengon, gife for gife.

17 Fordam de se wses gcseald ]>uv\\
Moysen ; and gifu and s6|)f£estucs is ge-
worden jjurh Hselend Crist.

18 Ne gescah nsefre nan man Goil,
butan se an-cenneda sunu liit cydilc, se
is on his faeder bearme.

1

And daet is Johannes gewitncs,^ da
da ludcas sendon hyra sacerdas and
hyra diaconas fram lerusalem to him,
doet hi acsodon hyne and dus cweedon,
Hwaet cart dii 1

20 And he cydde, and ne wid-scc, and

dus cwse]?, Ne eom ic na Crist.

21 And hii; acsodon hinc and dus
cwaedon, Eart dii Elias 1 And he cwa>|>
Ne eom ic hit. Da cwacdon lii, Eart dii
witega? And he andwyrdc and cwajr,
Nic.

22 H.ig cwaedon to him, Hwa't eart
dii ? dsct we andwyrdc bringon dam de
Hwj\3t scgst dil be de
us to de sendon,
sylfum 1

23 He cw8e|>, Ic com clypicndes stefn
on wcstene, Gerihta]> Drihtncs wog, swa
se witega, Isaius, cwaej?.

24 And da de da^r asende wa'ron, da

WJeron of Sundor-halgon.

25 And hig acsodon hinc, and cwivdon
to him, Hwi fullast dii, gif dii ne cart
Crist, ne Helias, ne witega ]

26 lohannes him andswarodo, Ic fullige
on wa?tcrc, to-middes cow stod, de go
ne cunnon

27 He is, de a'ftcr me towcard is, so
w;cs geworden befcjran me, ne com ic
wyrdc, da?t ic unbinde his scco-))wang.

2S Das |)ing wneron gcwordcnc on
Lethania begeondan lordancn, dajr lo-
hannes fullodc."'"

;

;

;

8
7

;

;

I. 15-28.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

443

bigetun of the fadir, the sone ful of grace,
and of treuthe.

15 John beritb witnessing of him, and
cryeth, seyinge, This it was, whom I
seide, He that cometh aftir me, is raaad
formere
bifore me, for he was the
than I

16 And of the plente of him we alle

begotten sonne off the father, which
worde was full of grace, and verite.

15 Jhon bare witnes off hym, sayinge,
Tliys is he, of whome I spake. He that
commeth after me, was before me, be
cause he was yer then I

16 And of his fulnes have all we re-

han takun, and grace for grace.

ceaved, even favour for favour.

17 For the lawe is 30uun by Moyses

forsoth grace and treuthe is maad by
Jhesu Crist.

A 8 No man euere sy; God, no but the
con bigetun sone, that is in the bosum
of the fadir, he hath told out.

19 And this is the witnessing of John,
whanne Jewis
Jerusalem
prestis and dekenys to hym, that thei
schulden axe him, AYho art thou 1

senten

fro

20 And he knowelechide, and denyede
not, and he knowlechide. For I am not
Crist.

21 And thei axiden him, What ther-
fore ? art thou Elye"? And he seide, I
am not.
Art thou a prophete ? And
he answeride. Nay.

22 Therfore thei seyden to him, Who
art tliou 1 that we ^yue answere to thes
that sente vs. What seist thou of thi
silf?

23 He seith, I a vois of the crying in
desert, Dresse 50 the wey of the Lord,
as Ysaye, the prophete, seyde.

1

For the lawe was geven by Moses ;
but favour and verite cam by Jesus
Christ.

1

No man sawe God at eny tyme, the
only begotten sonne, which is in the
fathers bosum, hath declared hym.

19 And this is the recorde off Jhon,
when the lewes sent prestes and levites
from Jerusalem, to axe hym. What arte
thou?

20 And he confessed, and denyed nott,

and sayde playnly, I am nott Christ.

21 And they axed hym, Wliat then?
arte thou Helias ? And he sayde, I am
Arte thou a prophet? And he
nott.
answered, Noo.

22 Then sayd they vnto hym, What
arte thou % that we maye geve an answer
to them that sent vs. What sayest thou
of thy silfe ?

23 He sayde, I am the voyce of a cryar
in the wildernes. Make strayght the
waye of the Lorde, as sayde the prophet,
Esayas.

24 And thei that weren sente, weren

24 And they which were sent, wcr off

of the Pharisees.

25 And thei axiden him, and seiden to
liim, What tlicrfore baptysist thou, if
thou art not Crist, nethir Eiye, nether
prophete 1

26 John answeride to hem, seyinge, I
baptise in watir, sothli the myddil man
of 30U stood, wliom 3e knoweii not

27 He it is, that cometh aftir me, that
is maad l)ifore mc, of wliom I am not
wortlii, that 1 vnl*yn<lc tlio tliwong of
his Hchoo.

28 TlicH tliiiigi.s

I'lctliany
oucr Jordan, wlier Jolm was l)aptisinge.

\h'.\\ don in

the Pharises.

25 And they axed hym, and sayde vnto
him, Why baptisest thou then, yf thou
be nott Christ, nor Helias, nctlicr a pro-
phet 1

26 Jhon answered thcni, sayinge, I
baptise with water, butt one is come
amongc you, whom ye knowe nott

27 He it is, that commeth after mc,
wliichc was before mc, wliosc
shouc
hitchct [ am not worthy to vnlosc.

28 TIicsc tliyngcH were dont; in lU-tli-
aburu ])eyonde Jordan, where Jhon did
baptise.

444

29

Sai ! sa I'st wi|)rus Gujjs ; saei

afnimi]) frawaurht J)izos manasetlais.^

1

;

;

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

29 O'dre daege lohannes geseah done
Hselend to him cumende, and cw?e[',
Her is Godes lamb ; her is se do dej?
aweg middan-cardes synoa.

30 Des is, be dam ic ssede, -^fter me
cym j) wer, de beforan me geworden waes
fordam de he wais aer donne ic.

3

And ic hyne nyste, ac ic com and
fullode on waetere, to dam da^t he wscre
geswutelod on Israhela folcc.

32 And lohannes cydde gewitnesse,
cwedende, Diet ic geseah nyder-cuniend-
ne gast of heofenum, swa swa culfran,
and wunode ofer hine.
33 And ic hine ne cude ; ac se de me
sende to fullianne on waetere, he cwae})
to me, Ofer done de du gesyhst nydcr-
stigendne Gast, and ofer hine >\'unicudnc,
dset is, se de fullaj) on Halgum Gaste.

34 And ic geseah, and gewitnesse
cydde, d»t des is Godes sunu."*"

35 Eft odre daegc stod lohannes, and

twegen of his leorning-cnihtum ;

36 And he cwa^l^, da he geseah done
Hselend gangende, Her is Godes lamb.

37 Dagehyrdon hyne twegen leorning-
specende, and fyligdon dam

cnihtas
Hselende.

38 Da beseah se Hselend, and geseah
hig him fyliende, and c\vx]> to him,
HwcTt sece gytl Hi cwacdon to him,
Rabbi, dret is gecwedcn and gereht,
Lareow, hwar eardast dii ?
39 He cwa3|> to him, Cumaj^, and ge-
Hig comon, and gesMWon hwar
seo}).
he wunode ; and mid him wunodon on
dam daige.

Hit woes dti seo teo|>e tid.

40 Andreas, Simoncs brcder Potres,
waps oder of dam twam, da gehyrdon set
lohanDe, and him fyligdon,

41 Des gcmctte serest Simoncm his
broder, and cwa?}) to him, We gemetton
Messiam, dait is gereht Crist

42 And hig gclccddon hine to dam
Dii beheold se Haelend hyne,
Haclende.
and cwa^ji, Du cart Simon, lonan sunu ;
du bist genemned Cephas, daet is gereht
Pctrus.

;

;

;

1

;

I. 29-42.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

445

29 Another day John sy^ Jhesu com-
ynge to him, and he seith, Lo !
the
lomb of God ; lo ! that doith a wey the
synnes of the world.

30 This is, of whom I seide, Aftir me
Cometh a man, that is maad bifore me
for he was the form ere than T.

31 And I knewe not him, but that he
be schewid in Israel, therfore I cam
baptisinge in watir.

32 And John bar witnessing, seyinge,
For I si3 the spirit comynge doun, as a
culuere fro heuene, and dwellinge on
him.

33 And I knew not him : but he that
sente me for to baptise in watir, seyde
to me. On whom thou schalt se the
Spirit comynge doun, and dwellinge on
him, this it
is, that baptisith in the
Hooly Gost.
34 And I sy3, and bar witnessing, for

this is the sone of God.

29 The nexte daye Jhon sawe Jesus
commynge vnto hym, and sayde, Be-
hold e ! the lambe of God, whych taketh
awaye the, synne off the worlde.

30 This is he, of whom I sayde, After
me commeth a man, which was before
me ; for he was yer then I.

3

And I knew hym nott, butt that he
shuld be declared to Israhell, therfore
cam I baptisynge with water.

32 And Jhon bare recorde, sayinge, I
sawe the sprete descende from heven,
lyke vnto a dove, and it aboode apon
hym.
33 And I knewe hym not ; but he that
sent me to baptyse in water, sayde vnto
me, Apon whom thou shalt se the Sprete
descende, and tary sty 11 on hym, the
same is he, whych baptiseth wyth the
Holy Goost.

34 And I sawe yt, and have borne re-

corde, that thys ys the sonne off God.

35 Another day John stood, and tweyne

35 The next daye after Jhon stode

of his disciplis

36 And he biholdinge Jhesu walkynge,

seith, Lo ! the lomb of God.

37 And tweye disciplis herden him
spekynge, and folwiden Jhesu.

agayne, and two off hys disciples :

36 And he behelde Jesus as he walked
by, and sayde, Beholde ! the lambe off
God.
37 And the two disciples herde hym
speake, and they folowed Jesus.

38 Sothli Jhesu conuertid, and seynge
hem suwynge him, seith to hem, What
seken 30 ] Whiche seiden to him, Raby,
that is interpretid, Maistir, where dwell-
ist thou 1

39 He seith to hem, Come 36, and se
Thei camen, and 8y3en where he
3e.
dwelte ; and thei dwelten at him in that
Sothli the our was as the tenthe.
day.
40 Forsothe Andrew, brother of Sy-
mount Petre, was oon of the tweyne,
that herden of John, and hadde sued
him.

41 This fond first his brother Symount,
and he seith to him. We han founde
Messias, that is interjjretid Crist

42 And he ledde him to Jhesu. Sothli
Jhesu bilioldingc him, seifh;, Tliou ert
Syniouiit, the sone of Johanna ; thou
Bchalt be clepid Cephas, that is inter-
pretid Petrc.

38 Jesus turned about, and sawe them
folowe, and sayde vnto them, What seke
ye 1 They sayde vnto hym, Rabi, which
say be interpretacion, Master,
is to
where dwellest thou 1
39 He sayde vnto them. Come, and se.
They cam, and sawe where he dwelt
and abode with hym that daye.
was about the tenthe houre.
40 Won off the two, whych herde Jhon
speake, and folowed Jesus, was Andrew,
Simon Peters brother.

For it

41 The same founde hys brother Simon
fyrst, and sayde vnto hym, Wc have
founde Messias, whych ys be interpre-
tacion Annountcd ;

42 And brought I»ym to Jesus.

And
Jesus ])cheldc hym, and sayde, Thou arte
Simon, the houmu off Jonas ; thoii shalt
be called Cephas, which is by interpre-
tacion, A stone.

446

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

43 On mergen he wolde faran on Gali-
lea, and he gemette Philippus ; and se
Haelcnd cwa3}> to him, Fylig me.

44 S6[jliee Philippus wa?s fram Beth-

saida, Andreas ceastre and Petres.

45 Philippus gemette Nathanahel, and
cwjcj? to him. We gemetton clone Ha'l-
end, losepes sunu, of Nazareth, (tone
wrat Moyses and da witegan on claere se.

46 And Nathanahel cwae)) to him, Mieg
|)ing godes beon of Nazareth 1
senig
Philippus cwsej) to him. Cum, and ge-
seoh.

47 Da geseah se Hstlend Nathanahel
to him cumendne, and cwa.^}? be him,
Her is Israhelisc wer, on dam nis nan
fa en.

48 Da ewfe{>

to

Nathanahel

him,
Hwanon cuctest dii me ? Da andswar-
ode se Haelend, and cwa^)) to him, Ic
geseah de, da du vrivre under dam fic-
treCwe, serdam de Philippus do clypode.
49 Him andswarode dii Nathan.ihel, and
dus cwa?}?, Rabbi, du eart Godes sunu,
and dii eart Israhela cing.

50 Dji cw{^}) se Hcclend to him, Du
gesyhst mare donne dys sy ; fordam de
du gelyfdest, da ic cwae}), diet ic gesawe
de under dam fic-treowe.

51 And he ssede him, Sojiic secge cow,
ge geseoj) opene heofenas, and Godes
englas up stigende and nyder stigende
ofer mannes sunu.

Chat. II.

^i On dam jmddan d.'\\ge
wccron gifta gewordene on Chanaa Ga-
lilea3 ; and da^s Haelendes modor wa^s
da?r.

2 S6j)Hce se Hsplend, and his leorning-
cnihtas w?5ron geladode to dam giftum.
3 And da da^t win gcteorode, da cwiv])
&XS Usclendes modor to him. Hi nabbaj)
win.

4 Da cwa^j) se Ila'lend to hyrc, La wif,
hwret is me and de 1 gyt min tima ne
com.

5 D'd cwa^|> dx8 Hselendes modor to

;

I. 43-n.5] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYND2VLE, 1526.

447

43 Forsothe on tlie morwe he wolde
go out in to Galilee, and be fond Philip
and Jhesu seith to him, Sue thou me.

44 Philip was of Bethsayda, the citee

of Andreu and Petre.

45 Philip fond Nathanael, and he seith
to him, We han founden Jhesu, the sone
of Joseph, of Nazareth, whom Moyses
wroot in the lawe and prophetis.

46 And Xathanael seide to him, Of
Nazareth may sum good thing be 1
Philip seith to him, Come, and se.

47 Jhesu sy5 Nathanael comynge to
him, and he seith of him, Lo ! verily
a man of Israel, in which is no gile.

48 Nathanael seith to him, Wherof
hast thou knowe me 1 Jhesu answeride,
and seith to him, Bifore that Philip
clepide thee, whanne thou were vndir
the fyge tree, I sy^ thee.

49 Natbanael answeride to him, and
seith, Rabi, thou ert the sone of God,
thou ert kyng of Israel.

50 And Jhesu answeride, and seide to
him, For I seyde to thee, I sy^ thee
vndir the fige tree, thou bileuest ; thou
schalt se more than these thingis.

51 And he seide to hem, Treuli I seie
to 30U, 5e schulen se heuene openyd, and
the aungels of God sti3ynge vp and
comynge doun on mannis sone.

43 The daye folowynge Jesus wolde
goo into Galile, and founde Philip ; and
sayde vnto hym, Folowe me.

44 Philip was of Betsaida, the cite of

Andrew and Peter.

45 Philip founde Nathanael, and sayde
vnto hym, We have founde hym, off
whom Moses wrote in the lawe and the
prophetes, Jesus, the sonile of Joseph,
of Nazareth.

46 And Nathanaell sayde vnto hym,
Can there eny goode tliynge come out
off Nazareth ]
Philip sayde to hym,
Come, and se.
47 Jesus sawe Nathanael commynge
to hjm, and sayde of hym, Beholde !
a right Hisrahelite, in whom is no gyle.

48 Nathanael sayd vnto hym, From
whence knewest thou me^ Jesus an-
swered, and sayde vnto hym, Before
that Philip called the, when thou wast
vnder the fygge tree, I sawe the.

49 Nathanael answered, and sayde vnto
hym, Rabi, thou arte the sonne off God,
thou arte the kynge of Israhel.

50 Jesus answered, and sayd vnto
hym, Be cause I sayde vnto the, I sawe
the vnder the fygge tree, thou belevest ;
thou shalt
greater thynges then
these.

se

51 And he sayde vnto hym, Verely,
verely I saye vnto you, here after shall
ye se heven open, and the angels off
God ascendynge and descendynge over
the Sonne off man.

Chap. II.

i And the thriddc day
weddingis ben niaad in the Cane^ of
Galilee ; and the modir of Jhesu was
there.

Chap. II.

i And the thryde daye
was there a mariage in Cana, a citie
of Galile ; and Jesus mother was there.

2 Sothli Jhesu is clepid, and his dis-

2 Jesus was called also, and his dis-

ciplis, to the weddingis.
3 And wyn faylin<;o,

tlie modir of
Jhesu seide to hiin, Tbci han not wyn.

4 And Jliesu seith to hlr, Wliut to mc
and to thee, thou woniuian 1 niyu our
cam not jit.

5 The modir of him seith

to

the

ciples, vnto the mariage.

3 And wlicn tlie wyne faylcd, Jesus
mother sayde vnto hym, They have no
wyne,

4 JcHUS sayde vnto her, Womiin, whnt
Ijave I to do with the'} niyne home is
not yctt come.

5 His mother sayde vnto the ministers,

448

GOTHIC, 360.

7

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

dam J)enum, D6\> swa liwaet swa he eow
secge.

6 Da3r wicron s6})lice aset six stsenene
wajter-fatu, aifter ludea geclsensungc, ailc
waes on twegra sestra geraete, odde on
})reora.

7 Da bead se Haelend clset hig da fatu
mid waetere gefyldon. And hig gefyl-
don da, od done brerd.

8 Da cwa'j? se Haelend, Hladaj) nu, and
beraj> daere drihte ealdre. And hi uamou.

9 Da se drihte ealdor daes wines on-
byrgde de of dam waetere geworden wscs,
he nyste hwanon hit com, da ))enas
s6})l]ce wiston, de dset waiter hlodon,
se drihte ealdor clypode done bryd-
guman,

10 And cwoej) to him, yE'lc man syl|)
serest god win, and donne hig druncene
beojj, daet de wyrse by]) ; da geheolde
daet gode win od dis.

11 Dis w?es dait forme tacn de se
Hselcnd worhte on Chanaa Galileae, and
gcswiitelode his wuldor ; and his Icorning-
cnihtas gelyfdon on hine.^

12 iEfter dysum he, and hys modor,
and his gebrodru, and his leorning-
cnihtas foron to Capharuaiim ; and wun-
edon dar feawa daga.

13 And hit wa»s neah ludea eastron,

and se Haelend for to Hicrusalcm.

14 And gemette on dam temple da de
sealdon oxan, and sceap, and culfran,
and sittende mynetcras.

15 And he worhte swipan of streng-
um, and hig ealle of dam temple adn^f,
ge sceap, ge oxan ;
jigeat
dara mynetera feoh, and towearp hyra
mysan.

and he

16 And saede dam de da culfran cyp-
ton, D6|) das \>\ng heonon, ne wyrce
ge mines fajder bus to mangimg-hiise.

1

Da gemundon his leorning-cnilitas,
diet de awriten is. Dines hiises anda
me xt.

18 Da andswaredon him da ludeas,
and cwaedon, Hw^lc tacn set-ywst du
us, fordam de dii das ]>mg dcst]

1

7
1

II. 6-i8.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

^

449

mynystris, What euere thing he schal
seie to 50U, do 50.

6 Forsothe ther weren put sixe stoonun
pottis, aftir the clensinge of Jewis, tak-
inge ech tweyne or thre mesuris.

7 Jhesu seith to hem, Fille ^e the
And thei fiUiden

pottis with water.
hem, til to the hi3este part.

8 And Jhesu seith to hem, Drawe 5e
now, and here 5e to architriclyn.^ And
thei token.
9 And as architriclyn tastide the watir
maad wyn, and he wiste not wherof it
was, sothli the mynystris wisten, that
drowen watir, architriclyn clepith the
spouse,

10 And seith to him, Ech man puttith
first good wyn, and whanne men schulen
Le fillid, thanne that that is worse; sothli
thou hast kept good wyn til to now.

1

Jhesu dide this the bigynnynge of
signes in the Cane of Galilee, and schewide
his glorie j and his disciplis bileueden
in to him.

12 Aftir thes thingis he cam doun to
Capharnaum, and his modir, and his
britheren, and his disciplis ; and thei
dwelten there not many dayes.

13 And the paske of Jewis was ny3,

and Jhesu wente vp to Jerusalem.

14 And he fond in the temple men
sellinge scheep, and oxen, and culueris,
and chaungeris sittinge.

15 And whanne he hadde maad as a
scourge of smale coordis, he castidc out
alle of the temi)le, and oxen, and scheep;
and he schedde out the moneye of
chaungeris, and turncde vpsodoun the
bordis.

16 And he seide to hem that sclden
culueris, Take a wey fro hcnnis thes
thingis, and nyle 30 make the hous of
my fadir an hous of marchaundise.

17 Forsothe his disciplis haddcn mynde,
for it is writun, Tiie feruour of loue of
thin hous hath etun me.

18 Therforc the Jewis answcridcn, and
Bcyden to him, Wiiat syngne^ schcvviHt
thou to VH, for thou doist thes thingis?

Whatsoever he sayeth vnto you, do itt.

6 There were stondynge sixe water
pottes of stone, after the maner of the
purifyinge of the lewes, contaynynge
two or thre fyrkyns a pece.

7 Jesus sayde vnto them, Fyll the
And they

water pottes with water.
fylled them, vp to the harde brym.

8 And he sayde vnto them, Drawe
outt nowe, and beare vnto the governer
of the feaste.

And they bare itt.

9 Wlien the ruler off the feast had
tasted the water that was turned vnto
wyne, nother knewe whence it was, butt
the mynisters, which drue the water,
knew, he called the brydegrome,

10 And sayde vnto hym. All men att
the be gynnynge sett forth goode wyne,
and when men be dronke, then thatt
which is. worsse ; butt thou hast kept
backe the goode wyne hetherto.

1

Thys begynnynge off myracles did
Jesus in Cana of Gallic, and shewed his
glory ; and his disciples beleved on hym,

12 After thatt descended he in to
Capernaum, and hys mother, and hys
brethren, and his disciples ; but con-
tinued not longe there.

13 And the lewes ester was even at
honde, and Jesus went vp to Jerusalem.
14 And founde in the temple those
that solde oxen, and shepe, and doves,
and chaungers of money syttynge.

15 And he made a scourge oft' smale
cordes, and drave them all out oft' the
temple, bothe shepe, and oxen ; and
powred dounc the changers money, and
ovcrthrue their tables.

16 And sayde vnto them that solde
doves. Have these thynges hence, and
make nott my fathers housse an houssc
off* marchandysc.

1

Hys disciples remembrcd, howe that
yt was written, The zelt^ of tliyiio hoiisso
hath even eaten me.

18 Then aiiswcTcd the kwcM, ui id sayde
vnto hini. What token shcwest tiiou vnto
vs, scyngc that thou dost these thynges?

1

450

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

19 Se Hselend him andswarode, and
cwa?}), Toweorpajj dis tempel, and ic hit
arsere binnan ^iim dagum.

20 Da ludcas cwicdon to liim, Dis
tempel wa^s getimbrod on six and foower-
tigura wintrum, and arserst du hit on
J>rym dagum ?

2

S6j)lice he h^i; cwoej) be hys lichaman

temple.

22 Da he of deajje aras, da gemundon
his lcorniuj;-cnihtas, da?t he hit be him
sylfum cwKJ) ; and hi gclyfdon halguni
gewrite, and daere sprsece de se Hselend
spraec.

23 Da he waes on Hierusalem on east-
ron, on freols-da^ge, manega gelyfdon
on his naman, da hi gesawon da tacna
da he worhte.

24 Se Hselend ne geswutelode hine

sylfne him, fordam he ciide hi ealle ;

25 And fordam him n?es nan jjearf,
doBt senig man ssede gewitnesse be men,
he wiste witodlice hwa3t wxs on men.

Chap. III.

^i S6|)lice sum Pharis-
eisc man waes, genemned Nichodemus,
se wa}3 ludea caldor.

2 Des com to him on niht, and cwoej)
to him. Rabbi, divt is lareow, we witun,
dcet dii come fram Gode ; ne ma^g nan
man das tilcn wyrcan de du wyrcst,
buton God beo mid him.

3 Se Hselend him andswarode, and
cwne}?, Sojj, ic de sccge, biiton hwa beo
edniwan gecenned, ne masg he geseon
Godes rice.
4 Dji cwse\> Nichodemus to him, Hu
ma^g man boon eft acenned, donnc he
bijj eald 1 cwyst dii ma\g he eft cuman
on his modcr innoji, and beon eft ficen-
ned?

5 So Hselend him andswarode and
cwa'|>, S6|', ic de secge, biiton hwa beo
ge-edcenned of waetere, and of Haligum
Gjiste, ne ma?g he in-faran on Godes
rice.

6 Da3t de acenned is of fls^sce, da*t ys

i

Anion, amen, qi|?a ]>us, niba
saci ^abairada "iupal'i-o, ni mag gasaiwh-
an j)iudangard}a Gu])S.^

4

"NVliaiwa
nialits Vst manna gabairan, al))ci.s wis-
il)ai mag in wamba ai|ieins seiu-
antls 1
aizos aftra galcijjau, yaggabairaidau 1

Amen, amen, qi|)a |)us, niba
saoi gal)airada us watin, yah Abmin, ni
mag ningaloi])an in ))iudangardya Gujjs.

;

;

9
1

;

II. I9.-IIL6.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

451

19 Jhesu answeride, and seyde to hem,
Vndo 3e this temple, and in thre dayes
I schal reyse it.

20 Therfore the Jewis seyden to him,
In fourty and sixe 5eeris this temple is
byldid, and thou in thre dayes schalt
reyse it ?

1

Jesus answered, and said vnto them,
Destroye this temple, and in thre dayes
I will rayse it vppe agayne.

20 Then sayde the lewes. In xlvj. yeares
this temple was bilt, and wylt thou rayse
it vppe in thre dayes ?

21 Forsothe he seide of the temple of

2

Butt he spake of the temple off hys

his body.

boddy.

22 Therfore whanne he hadde rysun
fro deed men, his disciplis hadden mynde,
for he seyde this thing ; and thei bileueden
to the scripture, and to the word that
Jhesu seide.

23 Forsothe whann^ Jhesu was at Je-
rusalem in pask, in the feeste day, manye
bileuyden in his name, seynge the syngnes
of him that he dide.

24 Sothli Jhesu him silf bileuede not
hym silf to hem, for that he knew alle
men

25 And for it was not nede to hym,
that eny man schulde here witnessing
of man, sothli he wiste what '^'as in
man.

22 As sone therfore as he was rysen
from deeth agayne, his disci i:)les remem-
bred, that he thus sayde vnto them
and they beleved the scripture, and the
wordes whych Jesus had sayde.

23 When he was at Jerusalem at ester,
in the feaste, many beleved on his name,
when they sawe the signes which he
did.

24 But Jesus put nott hym silfe in
their hondes, be cause he knewe all
men ;

25 And neded nott, that eny man
shulde testify off man, for he knewe
what was in man.

Chap. III.

i Forsothe ther was a
man of Pharisees, Nicodeme bi name, a
prince of Jewis.

2 He cam to Jhesu in the ny3te, and
seide to him, Raby, we witen, for of God
thou hast come a maistir ; sothli no man
may do thes signes that thou dost, no
but God were with him.

3 Jhesu answeride, and seyde to him,
Treuli, treuli, I seye to thee, no but
a man schal be born a^en, he may not
•BC the kyngdom of God.

4 Nycodeme seide to him, How may a
man be born, whanne he is olde % wlicr
he may eutre a^en in to Ida modris
wombe, and be born a3ein]

5 Jhesus answeride, Treuli, treuli, I
seic to thee, no l>iit a man schal be
born a3en of watir, and of the Hooly
Gost, he may not cutre in to tlie kyng-
dom of God.

6 That that is born of flcisch, is fleisch

CiiAP. III.

I There was a man off
the Pharises, named Nicodcmus, a ruler
amonge the lewes.

2 He cam to Jesus be nyght, and sayde
vnto him, Master, we knowe, that thou
arte a teacher whyche arte come from
God ; for no man coulde do suche mira-
cles as thou doest, except God were
wyth hym.

3 Jesus answered, and sayde vnto hym,
Verely, verely, I saye vnto tlie, except
that a man be boren a ncwe, he cannot
se the kingdom of God.
4 Nicodcmus sayde vnto hym, Howe
can a man be boren, when he is olde 1
can he enter into hys moders body, and
be boren agayne ]

5 Jesus answered, Verely, verely, I sayo
vnto the, except that a man be boren
of water, and of tlie Sprete, he cannot
enter into the kyngdom of God.

6 Tliat whych is boren of the flesslic,

u g 2

I

452

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

1

flaesc ; and daet de of gaste is accnned,
daet is gast.

7 Ne wundra du, fordani de ic ssede
de, Eow gebyra)) da't ge beoii aceunede
eduiwiin.

8 Gast oredaj) dar he wile, and dii
gcliyrst liis stefne, and du nast, Invanon
he cymj?, ne hwyder he gsej) ; swa is a^lc
de acenned is of gaste.

9 Da andsvvarode Nichodemus, and
cw£e|>, Hii ' magon das j>ing dus ge-
weordan 1

10 Se Hselend andswarode, and cwae])
to him, Du eart Idreow Israhela folce,
and du nast dCxa jjing 1

1

S6}>, ic de secge, dset we s])reca|',
dset we witon, and we cyda)>, dcet we
gesawon, and ge ne underfojj uie cyd-
nesse.

12 Gif ic eow corjjlice |)ing ssede, and
ge ne gelyfa)>, humeta gelyfe ge, gif ic
eow heofenhce j)ing secge ?

13 And nan man ne astihj) to heof-
nyder com of
enum, biiton
heofenum, mannes suuu se de com
of heofenum.

se de

14 And swa swa Moyses da naeddran
up-ahof on dam westene, swa gebyraj)
da3t mannes sunu bco up-ahafcn,

15 Da?t nan dara ne forwcorde, de on

hyne gelyf)), ac hsebbe dtet ece hf.^

16 God lufode middan-eard swa, divt
he sealde his an-ccnnedan sunu, aivt
nan ne forwcorde de on liine
ac haibbe doet ece lif.

gelyfj),

17 Ne sende God his sunu on middan-
card, da?t lie demde middan-carde, ac
diet middan-eard sy gehacled |iurh hine.

18 Ne h\\y dam gedemcd, de on hine
gelyfj); se de ne gelyfj) him, bi[> gedemcd,
fordam de he ne gelyfde on done naman
dses an-cennedau Godes suna.

19 Daet is se dom, da^t leoht com on
middan-eard, and menn Kifedon jjystro
swydor donne djet leoht : hyra wcorc
Wccron yfcle.

20 yE'Ic dara de yfele de)), hataj) dcet

1

2

2
1

ni. 7-20.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

453

and that that is bom of spirit, is spirit.

is flesshe ; and that which is boren of
the sprete, is sprete.

7 Wondre thou not, for I seye to thee,

7 Marvayle nott, that I sayd to the.

It behoueth 50U for to be born a5ein.

Ye must be boren a newe.

8 The spirit brethith wher it wole, and
thou heerist his vois, but thou wost not,
fro whennis he cometh, or whidir he
goth ; so is ech man that is borun of
the spirit.

9 Nycodeme answeride, and seide to

him, Hou mown thes thingis be don ?

8 The wynde bloweth where he listeth,
and thou hearest his sounde, butt thou
canst nott tell, whence he commeth, and
whether he goeth ; so is every man that
is boren of the sprete.

9 JSTicodemus answered, and sayde vnto

him, Howe can these thynges be 1

10 Jhesu answeride, and seyde to him,
Art thou a maistir in Israel, and knowist
not thes thingis 1

11 Treuli, treuli, I seye to thee, for
that that we witen, we speken, and that
that we han seyn, we witnessen, and 30
taken not oure witnessinof.

1

If I haue seid to 30U ertheli thingis,
and 56 bileuen not, how if I schal seie
to 30U heuenli thingis, schulen 3e bileue?

13 And no man styeth in to heuene,
no but he that cam doun fro heuene,
mannis sone that is in heuene.

14 And as Moyses reride vp a serpent
in desert, so it bihoueth mannus sone
for to be areysid vp,

15 That ech man that bileueth in to
him, perische not, but haue euerelastinge

lyf.

16 Forsothe God so louede the world,
that he 3af his oon bigetun sone, that
ech man that bileueth in to him perische
not, but haue euere lasting lyf.

17 Sothli God sente not his sone in to
the world, that he iuge the world, but
that the world be sauyd by hym.

18 He that bileueth in to him, is not
dcmyd ;^ forsothe he that bileueth not,
is now demed, for he bileueth not in
the name of the oon bigetun sone of
God.

19 Sothli this is the dom, for li3t cam
in to the world, and men louede more
derkncssis than li3t ; forsoth her workis
Wcren yuole.

20 Sothli cell man that doth yuelc.

10 Jesus answered, and sayde vnto
hym. Arte thou a master in Israhell,
and knowest nott these thynges ?

1

Verely, verely, I saye vnto the, we
speake that we knowe, and testify that
we have sene, and ye receave not oure
witnes.

1

YfF I have tolde you erthely thynges,
and ye have not beleved, howe shulde
ye beleve, if I shall tell you of hevenly
thynges 1

13 And noo man hath ascended vppe
to heven, butt he that cam doune from
heven, that ys to saye the sonne of man
which is in heven.

1 4 And as Moses lifte vppe the serpent
in wyldernes, even soo must the sonne
off man be lifte vppe,

15 That noo man which beleveth in

hym perisshe, but have eternall lyfe.

16 God soo loved the worlde, that he
gave his only sonne, for the entent that
none that beleve in hym shulde perisshe,
butt shulde have everlastynge lyfe.

17 For God sent not his sonne into
the worlde, to condempne the worlde,
but that the worlde through him myght
be saved.

18 He that beleveth on hym, shall not
be condempncd ; but he that beleveth
nott, is condempncd all rcdy, be cause
he beleveth nott in the name off the
only Sonne off God.

19 And this

is the condempnacion,
light is come into the worklo, and the
men have loved darckncs more then
light ; be cause their dedes were cvyll.

20 For every man that cvyll doeth,

454

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

1

1

;

leoht ; and he ne cym}) to leohte, dset
his wcorc nc syn gerihtlcchte.

2

Witodlice se de wyrcj? sojjfostnesse,
cym}5 to (tam leohte, da?t his weorc syn
geswutclode, fordam de hig synd on
Gode gedone.

22 A'l^tcr dyssum com se Ilsclcnd, and
his leorning-cuihtas, to ludca lande, and
wunode daer mid him, and fuUode.

23 And lohanncs fuUodc on Enon, wid
Salim, fordam de dier wseron mancga
wsetro ; and hi togaedere comon, and
wseron gefullode.

24 Da g}i; uses lohannes gedon on

23

naga wesun
yainar; yah qemun, yah daupidai wesun."''

24 Ni nauh|;anuh galagif)S was in kark-

arai lohanncs.

cweartern.^

25 pa|)roh l^an war|> sokeins us sipon-
yam lohanncs mi]? ludaium, bi SAvikn-
ein
26

.... Piahbei, saei w*as mij? })us hindar
Yaurdanau, |)ammei jni wcitwodides, sai!
sa daupei]?, yah allai gaggand du imma.

29

.... So nu fahcps meina usfulhioda.^

25 Da smcadon lohanncs Icorning-
cnihtas and da ludcas, be dcere clscns-
uuge.

26 And comon to lohannc, and cwccdon
to him, Rabbi, se de mid de wnes be-
geondan lordancn, be dam dii cyddcst
gewitnesse, mi ! he fulla|i, and ealle hig
cumaj) to him.

27 lohanncs and>v)Tde, and cWcT]), Ne
mseg mann nan j)ing underfCn, buton
hit bco hym of heofenum gcscald.

28 Ge sylfe me synd to gewitnesse,
daet ic saede, Ne eom ic Crist, ac ic
com ascnd bcforan hinc.

29 Se de bryde ha3f|>, se ys brydgnma;
se de is djes brydguman frcond, and
stent, and gehyrj? hyne, mid gcfcan he
gcblissa}?, for da^s brydguman stcfnc.
Dcs min gefca is gcfyllcd.

30 Yains skal wahsyan, i[> ik minznan.

30 Hit gcb}Ta|i da^t he wcaxe, and

31 Sa iupa|)ro qimands, ufaro allaim

3

Se de ufcnan com, se is ofcr calle

divt ic wanige.

)st ;

.

.

ist.

. sa us himina quniana, ufaro allaim

32 Yah )'atci gasawh, yag-gahausida,
l^ata wcitwodci|>, yah j)0 weitwodida "is
ni aiushun nimij).

se de of cor|n\n is,
cor})au ;

. se si)ryc}) be
se de of heofone com, se is

.

.

ofcr calle.

32 And he cy}i,

dii?t he gcscah, and
gehyrdc, and nan man ne undcrfch}) his
cydncsse.

33 S6)>licc.se dc his cydncsse undcr-
fchj', he gctacnaj) da?t God is s6))fa^stncs.

34 Se dc God scndc, spryc|> Godcs
word ; ne sylj? God done gast be ge-
niete.

III. 21-34.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

455

hatitli li^t ; and lie cometh not to the
li3t, that his workis be not reproued."^

21 Sothli he that doth treuthe, cometh
to the li3t, that his workis be schewid,
for thei ben don in God.

22 Aftir thes thingis Jhesu cam, and
his disciplis, in to the lond of Judee,
and there he dwellide with hem, and
baptiside.'''

23 Sothli John was baptisynge in En-
non, bisydis Salym, for many watris
were there j and thei camen, and weren
baptisid,

21

hateth the light; nether commeth to
light, lest his dedes shulde be reproved.
Butt he that doth the trueth.
commeth to the light, that his dedes
myght be knowen, howe that they are
wroght in God.

22 After that cam Jesus, and his disci-
ples, into the lewes londe, and there
abode with them, and baptised.

23 And Jhon also baptised in Enon,
besydes Salim, because there was moche
water there ; and they cam, and were
baptised.

24 Sothli John was not 3it sent in

24 For Jhon was not yet cast into

to prisoun.

25 Sothli a questioun^ is maad of
Johnis disciplis with the Jewis, of the
purificacioun'*'.

26 And thei camen to John, and seyde
to him, Rabi,''" he that was with thee
ouer Jordan, to whom thou hast born
witnessinge, to ! he baptyseth, and alle
men comen to him.
27 John answeridc, and seyde, A man
may not take ony thing, no but it be
50uun to him fro heuene.

28 3e 30U silf beren -svitnessing to me,
that I seyde, I am not Crist, but for I
am sent bifore him.

29 He that hath a spousesse^ is the
spouse ;'*' forsothe a frend of the spouse,
that stondlth, and heerith him, ioyeth
ioye, for the vois of the spouse.
in
Therfore in this thing my ioye is fillid.

30 It bihoueth him for to wexe, for-

Both mc to be menusid.^

31 He that cam fro abouc, is aboue

alle ; he that is of the erthe,
spc'kith of the erthe ; he that comith
fro heuene, is aboue alle.

.

32 And this thing that he sy^, and
herdc, he witncssith, and no man takith
liis witnessing.

33 Forsoth he that liuth tak^n liis wit-
nessing, hath markid that God is S(jth-
fast.

34 Forsoth he whom God sentc, spckith
the wonlis of God ;
forsotlie not to
mcsurc God 3yucth tlie spirit.

preson.

25 There a rose a question bitwene
Jhons disciples and the lewes, a bout
purifiynge.

2 6 And they cam vnto Jhon, and sayde
vnto hym, Master, beholde ! he that was
with the beyonde lordan, to whom thou
barest witnes, baptyseth, and all men
come to hym.
27 Jhon answered, and sayde, A man
can receave nothynge at all, except it
be geven hym from heven.

28 Ye youre selves are witnesses, howe
that I sayde, I am nott Christ, butt am
sent before hym.

29 He that hath the bryde is the
brydegrome ; but the frende off the
brydegrome, which stondeth by, and
heareth hym, reioyseth greately, of the
Therfore this my
brydgromes voyce.
ioye is fulfilled.

30 He must increace, and I muste de-

creace.

31 He that commeth from an hye, is
above all ; he that is off the erth, is of
the erth, and speakctli off the erth ;
he that commeth from heven, is above
alh

32 And tcstifycth that he hath scne,
and herdc, and his tostimony noo man
reccavoth.

33 Whosoever reccavith liis witnes, the

same luitli scaled that God is true.

34 For he wliom God hath sent, spcak-
eth tlie wonh'H off (Jod ; for God gcvcth
nott tlie sprcte l)y measure.

456

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

;

35 Fseder lufa|) done sunu, and sealdc

ealle jjing on liis hand.

36 Se de gclyf]) on sunu, se href)) ecc lif
se de dam suna is ungeleaffull, ne ge-
syli|) he lif, ac Godes yrre 'v>ainaj> ofer
hine.

Chap. TV.

i Da se Hselend wyste,
da?t da Pharisei gchyrdon, daet he haef-
de ma leorninfj-cnihtas .
. doune lo-
hannes,

.

2 Deah se Hselend nc fullode, ac his

leorning-cnihtas,

3 Da forlet he ludea land, and for eft
on Galilea.

4 Him gebyrode dset he sceolde faran
))urh Samaria land.

5 Witodlicc he com on Samarian coastre,
de is genemned Sichar, neah dam tune,
de lacob sealde losepe, his suna.

6 Daer wa?s lacobes vryW ;

"'^se Haelend
tet dam wylle, da he waes werig

sret
gegan. And hit wxs mid-djeg.

7 Da com dser an wif of Samaria,
Dfi cwrej) se Ilael-

wolde wieter fcccan.
end to liyre, Syle me drincan.

8 His leorning-cnihtas fcrdon da to

doere ceastre, woldon him mete bicgan.

9 Da cwfe|> dset Samaritanisce wif to
him, Hiimeta bitst dd set me drincan,
donnc dii cart ludcisc, and ic eom Sa-
maritanisc wif? ne brucaji ludeas and
Samaritanisce metes aetgaedcre.

10 Da andswarode se Hirlcnd, and
cwa^]) to hyre, Gif dii wistcst Godes
gyfe, and hwaet se is, de cwy}) to de,
Syle me drincan, witodlicc du bacde
hine, da^t he sealde do lifes waiter.

T I Da cw.t|> dirt wif to him, Leofne,
dii na^fst min j^ing mid to hladcnnc, and
des pytt is deop ; hwanon ha^fst dii
lifcs wa?ter ?

I 2 Cwyst du da^t du si maerra donne

2
1

1

IIL35--IV. 12.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

457

35 The fadir loueth the sone, and he

hath 50uun alle thingis in his hond.

36 He that bileueth in to the sone,
hath euere lastinge lyf j forsothe he that
is vnbileueful to the sone, schal not se
euerelasting lyf, but the wraththe of God
dwell ith on hym.

35 The father loveth the sonne, and

hath geven all thynges into his honde.

36 He that beleveth on the sonne, hath
everlastyng lyfe ; and he that beleveth
nott the Sonne, shall nott se lyfe, but the
wrathe of God bydeth on hym.

Chap. IV. i Therfore as Jhcsu knew,
that Pharisees herden, that Jhesu makith
mo disciplis and baptysith, than John,

2 Thou5 Jhesu baptiside not, but his

disciplis,
3 He lefte Judee, and wente a3en in to
Galilee.

4 Sothli it bihofte him to passe bi Sa-

marie.

5 Therfore Jhesu cam in to a citee of
Samarie, that is seyde Sycar, bisydis the
manere,^ that Jacob ^af to Joseph, his
sone.

6 Forsoth the welle of Jacob was there;
sothli Jhesu maad wery^ of the iurney,
sat thus on the welle.
Sothli the our
was, as the sixte.^
7 A womman cam of Samarie, for to
drawe watir.
Jhesu seith to hir, '^yue
to me for to drynke.

8 Forsoth his disciplis hadden gon in
to the citee, that thei schulden bye
metis.

9 Therfore the ilke womman of Sa-
marie seith to him. How thou, whannc
thou ert a Jew, axist of me for to
drynke, wliich am a womman of Sa-
marie ? forsothe Jewis vsen not with
Samaritans.

10 Jhcsu answeridc, and seide to hir,
If thou wistist the 3ifte of God, and
who it is, that seith to thee, 3yue to
mc for to
dr}-nke, thou j)crauciitiire
schuldest liauc axid of him, and he
schulde liaue 30uun to thee quyk watir.
The womman seith to liim, Sire,
nctlicr tliou hast in what tiling tiiou
Bclialt drawe, and the pitt is deep ; tlier-
fore whcrof hast thou quyk watir?

1

Chap. IV.

i As sone as the Lorde
had knoweledge, howe that it was come
to the eares off the Pharises, that Jesus
made and baptised moo disciples, then
Jhon,

2 Though that Jesus hym silfe baptised

not, butt his disciples,

3 He lefte Jewry, and departed agayne

into Galile.
4 And it was soo that he must nedes
goo thorowe Samaria.

5 Then cam he to a cite of Samaria,
called Sichar, besydes the possession,
that Jacob gave to his sonne, Joseph.

6 And there was Jacobs well ; Jesus
then weried in his iorney, sate thus on
Hit was about the sixte
the well.
houre.

7 There cam a woman of Samaria, to
Jesus sayde vnto her,

drawe water.
Geve me drynke.

8 For his disciples wer gone awaye

vnto the toune, to beye meate.

9 The woman off Samaria sayde vnto
hym, Howe is itt thatt thou, beinge a
lewe, axest drynke of me, which am
a Samaritane 1 for the Icwes medle not
with the Samaritans.

10 Jesus answered, and sayde vnto her,
If thou knewcst tlic gyftc of God, and
who it is, that saycth to the, Geve me
drynke, thou woldest have axed of hym,
and he wolde have gevcn the water of
lyfe.

1

Tiie woman sayde vnto hym, Syr,
thou liust noo thyngc to drawe it with
all, and the well is depc ; from whence
then liast thou that water off lyfe ?

1

Wlier thou art more tlian ourc

12 Arte thou grctter thou ourc father

t

453

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

7

;

;

;

urc foeder Jacob, se de us disne pytt
sealde 1 and he, and his beam, and his
nytenii of dam dnincon.

13 Da undswarode se Haelend, and
cwse}) to hyre, ^'Icne dara j^yrst eft, de
of dysum wpeterc dnnc|)

14 Witodlice selc dara de drincj> of

dara wsetere de ic him sylle,

h\\) on him will, for]>-raescndcs woetcres
on ece Hf.

15 Da cwnc}) divt w!f to him, Tllaford,
syle me diet wcetcr, dajt me no |'}Tstc,
ne ic ne |)Ui*fe her feccan.

16 Da ewa^j) se Htvlcnd to hyrc, Ga,

clypa dinne ceorl, and cum hider.

1

Dii andwyrde da3t "vnf, and cwa^j^,
Da cwa^|) se
Nrebbe ic naune ceorl.
Haelend to hyre, Wei dii cwa^de, da*t dil
ntefst ceorl

18 Witodlice du ha}fdest fif ccorlas,
and se de dii mi ha^fst, nis din ceorl.
JEt dam dii ssedest s6|>.

19 Da cwa?|) da^t wif to him, Lcof, dajs

de me |)inc}), dii cart witega.

20 U're foederas hig gcbacdon on dis-
serc dune, and ge secgaj), da't on Ilii-ni-
salem sy seo stow, divt man on-gcbidde.

21 Da cwpe)> se Hirlcnd to hyre. La
wif, gelyf me, da)t seo tid cymj), donne
ge ne gebidda}) ficder, ne on dissere
diine, ne on Hicrusalem.

22 Ge gebiddaj) d;et ge nyton ; we ge-
bidda|i da?t we witon ; fordam de hsel
is of ludeum.

23 Ac SCO tid cyml% and mi is, donne
s6|'e gebed-men gebidda}) fanler on gaste
and on s6jfa\stnesse ;
witodlice fiider
secj) swylce, de hyne gebiddon.

24 Gast is God, and dam de hyne ge-
bidda)), gebyraj) da^t hig gebiddon on
gtiste and on s6}>fa3stncsse.

25 Dset wif cwa3|> to him, Ic wat daet
!Mcssi}is cym]', de is gcnemncd Ci'ist
donne he cym|), he cy)> us ealle j'ing.

26 Se Hjclend cwjel? to liyre, Ic hit

eom, de wid de sprece.

1

;

;
;

1

;

;

IV. 13-26.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE 1526.

459

fadir Jacob, that ^aue to vs this pitt 1
and he drank therof, and his sones, and
his beestis.

13 Jhesu answeride, and seide to hir,
Ech man that drynkith of this watir,
schal thirste eftsoone

14 Forsothe he that schal drynke of
the watir that I schal ^yue to him, schal
not thirste in to with outen ende ; but
the watir that I schal 3yue to him, schal
be maad in him a welle of watir, spryng-
ynge vp in to euerelastinge lyf.

15 The womman seith to him, Sire,
5yue to me this watir, that I thirste not,
nether come hidir for to drawe.

Jacob, which gave vs this well 1 and he
hym silfe dranke there of, and his chyl-
dren, and his cattell.

13 Jesus answered, and sayde vnto
her. Whosoever drynketh of this water,
shall thurst agayne ;

14 But whosoever shall drynke of the
water that I shall geve hym, shall never
be moare a thyrst : but the water that
I shall geve hym, shalbe in hym a well
of water, spryngynge vp in to everlast-
ynge lyfe.

15 The woman sayde vnto hym, Syr,
geve me of that water, that I thyrst not,
nether come liedder to drawe.

16 Jhesu seith to hir, Go, clepe thin

16 Jesus sayde vnto her. Go, and call

hosebonde, and come hidur.

17 The womman answeride, and seide,
I haue not an hosebonde.
Jhesu seith
to hir, Thou seidist wel, For I haue not
an hosebonde ;

18 Forsoth thou hast had fyue hose-
bondis, and he whom thou hast, is not
This thing thou seidist
thin hosebonde.

thy husband, and come hydder.

17 The woman answered, and sayde
vnto hym, I have no husband.
Jesus
sayde to her, Thou hast well sayd, I
have no husbaude

18 For thou haste had five husbandes,
and he whom thou nowe hast, is not
thy housband. That saydest thou truely.

sothli.

19 The womman seith to him, Lord,

19 The woman sayde vnto hym, Syr,

I se, for thou art a prophete.

20 Oure fadris worschipiden in this
hil, and ^e seyn, for at Jerusalem is a
place, wher it bihoueth for to worschipe.

2

Jhesu seith to hir, Womman, bileue
to me, for the our schal come, whanne
nether in tliis hil, nether in Jerusalem,
5c schulen preye"*" the fadir.

22 3e worschipen that that 5c witen
not ; we worschipen that that we witen ;
for heelthe is of Jewis.

23 But the our cometh, and now it is,
whanne trewe worschi peris schulen wor-
schipe the fader in spirit and trcuthc
forwhi and the fadir sekith suche, that
Bchulcn worschipe him.

24 God is a spirit, and it bihoueth hem
that worschi[)cn him, for to worschipe
in spirit and trcutli.

25 The womniuii scitli to him, I woot

for Messias is comcn, that is seid Crist
thcrforc -whanne lie schul come, he schal
telle to vs alio thingis.

I perceave, that thou arte a prophet.

20 Oure fathers worshipped in this
mountayne, and ye saye, tliatt in Jeru-
salem is the place, where men ought to
praye.

2

Jesus sayde vnto her, Woman, trust
me, the houre cometh, when ye shall
nether in this mountayne, nor yet att
Jerusalem, worshippe the father.

22 Ye worshippe ye wot neare what

we knowe what we worshippe ; for sal-
vacion commeth of the Icwes.

23 But the houre commeth, and nowe
is, when the true worshippers shall wor-
shippe the father in sprctc and in vcrite ;
for verily suche the father rcquyreth, to
worshippe hym.

24 God is a sprcte, and they that wor-
shippe hym, must honourc hym in sprcte
and vorite.

25 The woman sayde vnto hym, I wot
well Mcssias shall come, which is called
Christ ; when he is once come, he will
tell VH all thynges.

26 Jhesu seith to hir, I am, that spckc

26 Jesus sayde vnto her, I thatt spcako

with thee.

vnto the, am he.

460

GOTHIC, 360.

1

;

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

27 And doer-rihte comon his leorning-
cnihtas, and hig wundredon, diet he wid
daet vnf sprsec ; deah hyra nan ne cwae)?,
Hwset secst du, odde, Hwoet sprycst dii
Avid hig 1

28 Witodlice daet ^vif forlct hjTe wseter-
faet, and code to dsere byrig, and cwaej)
to dam mannum,

29 Cumaj), and geseoj> done man, de

me saede ealle da )?ing de ic dydc
cwede ge is he Crist]

30 Da eodon hi ut of daere byrig, and

comon to him.

3

On gemang dam his leorning-cnihtas
hine ba?don, and dus cwaedon, Lareow,

et.
32 Da cwfiej) he to him, Ic hrebbe done
mete to etanne, de ge nyton.
33 Da cwaedon his
leorning-cnihtas
him betwynan, Hwoeder senig man him
mete brolite 1
34 Da cwaej) se Haelend to him, Min
mete is, daet ic wyrce da?s willan de me
sende, daet ic fuUfremme his wcorc.
35 Hu ne secge ge, doet mi gyt synd
feower monj^as, ser man ripan mrege 1
Nu !
ic eow secge, hebbaj? 11 pp eowre
eagan, and geseo}) das eardas, da?t hig
synd scire to ripanne.

36 And se de ripj? nimj) mede, and
gaderaj) wnestm on ecum Hfe ; da^t a^t-
gredere geblission se de saew[', and se de

37 On dyson is witodlice b6\> word,
fordam oder is se de saew]>, oder is se
de rij)}).

38 Ic sende cow to npannc, djvt dast
ge ne beswuncon ; odre swuncon, and
ge eodon on hyra geswinc.

39 "Witodlice manige Samaritaniscc of
da^re ccastre gelyfdon on hine, for da?s
wifes wordiim de be him cydde, Da^t he
saede me eallc da j'ing, de ic dyde.

40 Da da Samaritaniscan comon to
him, hig gebsedon hine, diut he wunode
doer ; and he wunode daer twegen dagas.

41 And myccle ma gelyfdon for his

spraece,

42 And cwaedon to dam wife, Ne ge-

IV. 27-42.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

461

27 And anon bis disciplis camen, and
wondriden, for he spak with a womman ;
netheles no man seide, AVhat sekist
thou, or, What spekist thou with hir ]

28 Therfore the womman lefte the
watir pott, and wente in to the citee,
and seith to tho men,

29 Come 56, and se ^e the man, that
seide to me alle thingis what euere
thingis I haue don ; wher he is Crist 1

30 And thei wenten out of the citee,

and thei camen to hym.

27 And even at that poynte cam bis
disciples, and marvelled, that he talked
with the woman ; yet no man sayde
vnto hym, What meanest thou, or. Why
talkest thou with her 1

28 The woman lefte her water pott
behynde her, and went her waye into
the cite, and sayde to the men there,

29 Come, se a man, whiche tolde me
all thynges thatt ever I dyd ; is not he
Christ 1

30 Then they went out off the cite,

and cam vnto hym.

31 In the mene while his disciplis

31 In the meane whyle bis disciples

preieden him, seyinge, Rahy,^ ete.

prayed hym, saynge, Master, eate.

32 Sothli he seide to hem, I haue mete

for to ete, that ^e witen not.
33 Therfore the disciplis

seiden to
gidere, Wher ony man brou3te to him
for to ete ?
34 Jhesu seith to hem, My mete is,
that I do the will of him that sente me,
and that I performe the work of him.

35 Wher 56 seyn not, for ^it foure
monethis ben, and rype corn cometh 1
Lo !
I seie to 30U, lift vp ^oure y^en,
and se 50 the regiouns,^ for now thei
ben white to ripe corn.

36 And he that repith takith byre,"*"
and he that gederith, fruit in to euere-
that and be that sowith
lasting lyf;
haue ioye to gidere, and he that repith.
37 In this thing sothli the word is
trewe, for another is that sowith, and
another that repith.

38 I sente 30U for to repe, that that ^e
traueliden not ; othere men traueliden,
and 3e entriden in to her trauclis.

39 Forsoth of the citee many Samari-
tans 1/ilcuedcn in to him, for the word
of the womman beringc witnessing, For
he seide to me alle thingis, what euere
thinf(is I dide.

biiii,

40 Therfore whannc Samaritans camen
preieden bim, that be
to
scliuldc dwelle there ; and be dwclte
there twey dayes.

thei

41 And many mo bilcueden for his

word,

42 And scyden to the womman, For

32 He sayde vnto them, I have meate

to eate, that ye knowe nott off.

33 Then sayd the disciples bitwene
them selves. Hath eny man brought
hym meate 1
34 Jesus sayd vnto them, My meate
ys, to fulfill the will off hym that sent
me, and to fynnysshe hys worcke.

35 Saye not ye, there are yett foure
monethes, and then commeth harvest 1
I saye vnto you, lyfte vppe
Beholde !
youre eyes, and loke on the regions, for
they are whyte allredy vnto harvest.

36 And be that repeth receaveth re-
warde, and gaddereth frute vnto lyfe
that bothe he that sowetb
eternall ;
myght reioyce also, and be thatt repeth.
37 And here in ys the sayinge true,
that won sowetb, and another repeth.

38 I sent you to repe, that wheron ye
other men la-
bestowed no laboure ;
boured, and ye are entred into their
labours.

39 Many off the Samaritans off the
cite beleved on hym, for the womans
sayinge whych testifycd, He tolde me
all thynges, that ever I did.

40 Then when the Samaritans were
come vnto hym, they besought byni,
that he wolde tury wytiu them ; and he
aboode there two dayes.

41 And many moo beleved because off

bys awne wonlcs,

42 And sayde vnto tlie woman, Nowe

4G2

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

lyfc we na for dinre spraece ; we sylfe
gcliyrdon, and we witou, dyet lie is so})
middan-eardes bseleud.

43 S6|)lice refter twain dagiim lie ferde

danone, and for to Galilea.

44 Se. Haelcnd sylf cydde gewitnesse,
diet nan witega niefj? naune wurjjscipc
on hys agenum earde.

45 Da he com to Galileam, da under-
fengon hi Line, da hi gesawon calle da
binfr de he worhte on Ilierusa^.em, on
freols-da3ge ; and hi comon to aam
freols-dsege.

46 And he com eft to Chanaa Galilea,
dser he worhte diet win of waetere."''
Sum under-cyning wa^s, dies sunu woes
gesyclod on Capharnaum.
47 Da da se gehyrde, dajt se Hselend
for fram ludea to Galilcii, he com to
him, and hied hine, di^et he fore, and ge-
hselde his suuu ; soj^lice he \xg a^t for|:-
fore.

48 Da cwie|> se Ilselend to him, Biiton
ge tacna and fore-beacua geseon, ne
gelyfe ge.

49 Da cwie|> se under-cing to him,
Drihten, fiir, aer min sunu swclte.

50 And se ILelcnd •cwa?}), Ga, din sunu
lyfa}). Da code he, and gelyfde di\3re
spraece, de se Hseleud him saede.

5[ Da he for, da urnon his ))eowas on-
geiin hyne, and sacdou, Da^t his sunu
lyfode.

52 Da ilcsode he, to h\N'}'lcum timan
And hi sa:don him,
him bet waere.
GyT8tan-da3g to diere scofe)iau tide se
fefer hine forlet.

53 Dii ongcat se fa^der, da^t hit wies
on div^re tide, de se Hadend cwaj), Din
sunu Icofa)) ; and he gelyfde, and call
his hiw-ra^dden.

54 Se Hcclend worhte dis tiiccn

eft
odre side, da he com fram ludca lande
to Galilea.

Chap. V.

^i ^Efter dyssum wa^a

IV. 43.-V. I.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

463

now uot for tlii speche we bileuen ; for-
sotli we han herd, and we witen, for
this is verily the sauyour of the world.

43 Forsoth aftir twei dayes he wente

thennis, and wente in to Galilee.

44 Sothli Jhesu bar witnessing, for a
prophete in his owne cuntree hath not
honour.'*'

45 Therfore whanne he cam in to
Galilee, men of Galilee receyueden him,
whanne thei hadden seyn alle thingis
that he hadde don in Jerusalem, in the
feeste day ;^ and sothli thei hadden
come to the feeste day.

46 Therfore he cam eftsoone in to
Cana of Galilee, where he made the
And sum litil king was,
watir w}ai.
whos sone was syk at Capharnaum.
47 Whanne this hadde herd, for Jhesu
schulde come fro Judee in to Galilee,
he wente to him, and preiede him, that
he schulde come doun, and heele his
Bone ; forsoth he bigan to deye.
48 Therfore Jhesu seide to him, No
but 5e schulen se tokenes and grete
wondris, ^e bileuen not.

49 The litil kyng seith to him, Lord,
come doun, bifore my sone deye.

50 Jhesu seith to him, Go, thi sone
The man bileuede to the word,
lyueth.
that Jhesu seide to hym, and he wente.

51 Sothli now him comynge doun, the
seruauntis camen a3ens him, and telden
to him, seyinge. For his sone lyuede.

52 Therfore lie axide of hem tlie our,
in whichc he hadde betere. And thei
the
Beiden
seuenthe our the feuere lefte him.

to him, For 3i3tirday

in

53 Therfore the fadir knew, that the
ilkc our it was, in wliich Jhesu seide to
him, Thi sone lyuetli ; and he bileuede,
and al liis hoiis.

54 Jhesu dide eft this secundc tokene,
whanne he cam fro Judee in to Galilee.

we beleve nott be cause off thy sayinge ;
for we have herde hym oure selves, and
knowe, thatt thys ys even in dede Christ,
the savioure off the worlde.

43 After two dayes he departed thence,

and went awaye into Galile.
44 And Jesus hym silfe testifyed, that
a prophet hath none honoure in hys
awne countre.

the

Galileans

45 Then as sone as he was come into
receaved hym,
Galile,
which had sene all thynges that he did
at Jerusalem, on the feast ;
for they
went also vnto the feast daye.

46 And Jesus cam agayne into Cana
of Galile, where he tourned water into
wyne. And there was a certayne rueler,
whose Sonne was sycke at Capernaum.

47 As sone as he herde, that Jesus was
come out of lewry into Galile, he went
vnto hym, and besought him, that he
wolde descende, and heale his sonne ;
for he was even redy to deye.

48 Then sayde Jesus vnto hym, Ex-
signes and wonders, ye

cepte ye se
beleve not.

49 The rueler sayde vnto hym, Syr,
come awaye, or ever that my chylde
deye.

50 Jesus sayde vnto him, Goo thy
waye, thy sdnne liveth. And the man
that Jesus had
beleved
spoken vnto hym, and went his waye.

the wordes,

51 And anon as he went on his waye,
his servauntes mett hym, and tolde hym,
sayinge, Thy sonne liveth.

52 Then enquyred he of them the
houre, when he began to amende. And
they sayde vnto hym, Yoster daye the
seventhe houre the fever lefte hym.

53 And the father knew, that it was
the same houre, when Jesus sayde vnto
hym. Thy sonne liveth ; and he beleved,
and all his houshold.

54 Thys ys agayne the scconde myraclo
that Jesus did, after he cam out of lewry
into Galile.

Chap. V.

i Aftir tlirs thin-ns wns

(U\AV. V.

I After that there was a

464

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

2
1

ludea freols-dseg, and se Hselend for to
Hicrusalem.

2 On Hierusalem

ys an mere,
se is genemned on Ebreisc Bethzaida,
se mere haefj) fif porticas.

3 On dam porticon lajg mycel menigeo
ge-adledra, blindra, and healtra, and
forscruncenra, and ge-anbidedon dxs
wffiteres styrunge.

4 Drihtenes engel com to his timan on
done mere, and daet waeter waes astyred ;
and se de radost com on done mere,
sefter daes wa?teres styrnnge, '\vcar|> ge-
liaeled fram swa hwylcere untrumnesse
swa he on waes.

5 Daer waes sum man, eahta and j>rittig

wintra on his untrumnesse.

6 Da se Hselend geseah dysne licgan,
and wiste, daet he lange hwyle dar wies,
da cwaejj he to him, Wylt du hal beon 1

7 Da andswarode se seoca him, and
cwae]>, Drihten, ic na^bbe nanne man
d^et me do on done mere, donne divt
waeter astyred bij) ; donne ic cume,
donne h\\> oder beforan me.

8 Da cwaej) se Haelend to him, A'ris,

nim din bed, and gL

9 And se .man waes sona hal, and he
Hit wa?s reste-

nam his bed, and code.
daeg on dam daege.

10 Da cwaedon da ludeas to dam de
dar gehacled wa\s, Hit is rostc-da^g, nis
de alyfed, da3t du din bed here.

1

1

He andswarode him and cwa?J), Se
de me gchaclde, se cwa^J? to mc, Nim
din bed, and ^L

Da acsedon hi hine, Hw»t se man
wacrc, de de sacde, Nim din bed, and
ga 1

13 Se dc daer gehaeled waes, nyste hwa
Se Hselend s6j)lice bcah fram

hit woes.
dajre gegaderunge.

14 yEftcr dam se Haelend hine gemette
on dam temple, and cwa3|) to him, Nu !
dii cart hal geworden ; ne synga du,
de-la3s de de on sumum j^ingum wyrs
getide.

1

1

V. 2-14.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYJSDALE, 1526.

465

a feeste day of Jewis, and Jhesu weiite
vp to Jerusalem.

feast off the lewes, and Jesus went vppe
to Jerusalem.

2 Forsoth in Jerusalem is a stonding
watir of beestis, that in Ebrew is named
Betlisayda, hauynge fiue litle 5atis.

3 In thes lay a greet multitude of lan-
gwischinge men, blynde, krokid, drye,
abidinge the stiring of the watir.

4 Forsothe the aungel of the Lord
aftir tyme cam doun in to the stonding
watir, and the watir was moued ; and
he that first cam doun in to the sisterne,
aftir the mouyng of the watir, was maad
hool of what euere siknesse he was
holdun.

5 Forsothe sum man was there, hau-
ynge ei3te and thritti 5eeris in his syk-
nesse.

6 Whanne Jhesu hadde seyn him ligg-
ynge, and hadde knowe, for now he
hadde moche tyme, he seith to him, Wolt
thou be maad hool ?

7 The syke man answeride to him,
Lord, I haue not a man that whanne
the water schal be troublid, he sende
me in to the sisterne ; forsoth the while
I com, another goth down bifore me.

2 There is at Jerusalem by the slaugh
ter housse a pole, called in the Ebrue
tonge Bethesda, havynge five porches.

3 In them laye a greate multitude off
sicke folke, off blynde, halt, and wyd-
dered, waytynge for the movynge off
the wather.

4 For an angell went doune at a cer-
tayne ceason into the pole, and stered the
water ; whosoever then fyrst, after the
sterynge off the water, stepped doune,
was made w^hoale of what soever disease
he had.

5 And a certayne man was there, which

had bene disieased .xxxviij. yeares.

6 When Jesus sawe hym lye, and
knewe, that he nowe longe tyme had
bene diseased, he sayde vnto hym, Wilt
thou be whoale 1

7 The syke answered hym, Syr, I have
no man when the water is moved, to
put me into the pole ; butt in the meane
tyme whill I am about to come, an-
other steppeth doune before me.

8 Jhesu seith to him, Ryse vp, taak

8 Jesus sayde vnto hym, Ryse, take vp

thi bed, and wandre.

9 And a non the man is maad hool,
and took vp his bed, and wandride.
And saboth was in that day.

10 Therfore the Jewis seyden to him
that was maad hool, It is saboth, it is
not leeflul to thee, for to take thi bed.

1

He answeride to hem, He that
maade me hool, seide to me, Taak thi
bed, and wandre.

12 Therfore thei axiden him, Who is
that man, that scidc to thee, Taak thi
bed, and wandre ?

thy beed, and walke.

9 And immediatly that man was whole,
and toke vp his beed, and went. And
the same daye was the saboth daye.

10 The lewes therfore sayd vnto hym
that was made whole, It is the saboth
daye, it is nott laufuU for the to cary
thy beed.

1

He answered them. He that made
me whole, sayde vnto me, Take vp thy
beed, and gett the hence.

12 Then axed they hym. What man is
that, which sayd vnto the. Take vp thy
beed, and walke 1

13 Sothli he that was maad hool, wistc
Forsotlie Jliesu bowide
not wlio it was.
him fro the cumpany ordeyned^ in the
place.

14 Aftirward Jlie.su f(jnd liim in the
temple, and seide to him, Lo ! thou ert
mjuid hool ; now nylc thou <lo Hyunc,
lestc ony thing worae bifalle to thee.

13 And he that was healed, wist not
For Jesus gatt hym silfe
who yt was.
awaye, be cause that there was prcacc
of peo])le in the ])lace.

14 After that Jesus founde hym in the
temple, and sayd vnto hym, l^eholde !
thou arte; made whole ; se thou Hynno
no moorc, lest a worsse thinge happen
vnto the.

n h

466

GOTHIC; 360.

6
7

;

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

15 Da for se man, and cydde hit ctam
ludcum, diet hit wsere se Ilselend de
hyne ha-lde.

1

Fordara da ludeas ehton done Hael-
fordam de he dydc das

end,
J)iug on reste-dsege."*"

1

Da andswarode se Hselend him and
cwse]), Miu fieder wyrcj) od dys mi g} t,
and ic >v}Tce.

18 Dajs de ma da ludcas s'hton hine
to ofsleanne, nces na fordam anum de he
done rcste-dseg br?ec, ac fordam de he
cwfBJj dset God waere his faeder, and hine
sylfne dyde Gode gelicne.

19 Witodlice se Hselend andswarode,
and cwaejj to him, S6}^, ic eow secge, ne
mseg se sunu nan ping don, buton dat
he gesyhj) his fteder don ; da |)ing de he
wyrc}>, se sunu wyrc)? gelice.

20 Se foeder lufaj> done sunu, and ge-

swutelaj) him ealle da jjing de he wyrc|>
and maran weorc donne das syn he ge-
swutelajj him, dcet ge wundrion.

21 Swaswe auk atta urraisci}) dau])ans,
yah liban gatauyi]), swa yah suuus |>anzci
will liban gatauyi)).^

21 Swa se ficder awecj^ da deadan, and
geliffiest, swa eac se sunu geHffivst du
de he wyle.

22 Nili Jjan atta ni stoyi]) ainohun, ak

staua alia atgaf sunaii,

22 Ne se fieder ne dem|) nanum menn,

ac he sealde selene dom dam suna,

23 Ei alhii sweraina

sunu, swaswe

swcrand attau

23 Dset ealle ar>vur)non done sunu,
swa swji hig arwur|)iaj) done fa?der.
Se
de ne arwurjnij) done sunu, ne arwurj^a})
he done faidcr de hine sende.

24 So}), ic secge cow, di\?t se de min
word geliyr]), and dam gclyf)> de me
sende, se hjvf)? eee Hf, and ne cymj) a't
dam dome, ac faerj) fram dcaj'C to h'fe.

25 S6|>, ic sccge eow, da?t sco tid cym}),
and nu is, donne da deadan gehyra^
Godcs suna stcfne, and da lybba]», de
hig gehyra)).

26 Swa se fa3der luTfj? Hf on him sylf-
uni, swii he scakle dam suna di\}t he
hit'fdc lif on him sylfum ;

*

6
1

;

V. 15-2 6.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

4G7

15 The ilke man wente, and telde to
the Jewis, for it was Jliesu that maad
him hool.

1

Therfore the Jewis pursueden Jhesu,
for he dide this thing in the

saboth.

17 Forsoth Jhesu answeride to hem,
My fadir worchith til now, and I worche.

18 Therfore thanne the Jewis sou5ten
more for to slee hym, for not oonly
he brak the saboth, but and he seide
his fadir God, makinge him euene to
God.

19 And so Jhesu answeride, and seide
to hem, Treuli, treuli, I seie to 30U, the
sone may not of him silf do ony thing,
no but that thinjj that he scbal se the
fadir doynge ; what euere thingis sothli
he doith, thes thingis and the sone also
doith.

20 Forsothe the fadir loueth the sone,
and schewith to him alle thingis that he
doith ; and he schal schewe to him more
workis than thes, that 3e wondre.

2

Forsothe as the fadir reysith deede
men, and quykeneth, so and the sone
quykeneth whiche he wole.

2 2 Sothli neither the fader iugeth ony
man, but hath 30uun al the dom to the
Bone,

23 That alle men honoure the sone,
He that
as thei honouren the fadir.
honoureth not the sone, honoureth not
the fadir that scnte him.

24 Treuli, treuli, I seye to 50U, for he
that liecritii my word, and bileuctli to
him that scnte me, hath cuere lasting
lyf, and comcth not in to dom, but
passith fro deotli in to lyf.

25 Treuli, treuli, I seye to 50U, for tlie
our Cometh, and now it i.s, whanne dccdc
men schulen hcere the vois of Goddis
Bene, and thei tliat schulcn hcerc, scliulcn
lyue.

26 Sothli as the fader hath lyf in him
silf, HO lie 3af and to the sone for to
hauc lyf in him silf;

15 The man departed, and tolde the
lewes, that yt was Jesus the whyche
had made hym whole.

16 And therfore the lewes did perse-
cute Jesus, and sought the meanes to
slee hym, be cause he had done these
thynges on the saboth daye.

17 Jesus answered them, My father

worketh hidderto, and I worke.

18 Therfore the lewes sought the moore
to kill hym, not only be cause he had
broken the saboth, but sayde alsoo that
God was his father, and made hym silfe
equall with God.

19 Then answered Jesus, and sayde
vnto them, Verely, verely, I saye vnto
you, the sonne can do noo thynge of
hym silfe, but that he seyth the father
do ; for whatsoever he doeth, that doeth
the sonne also.

20 For the father loveth the sonne,
and sheweth hym all thynges whatsoever
he him silfe doeth ; and he will shewe
hym gretter thynges then these, be cause
ye shoulde marvayle.

2T For lykwyse as the father rayseth
vppe the deed, and quyckeneth them,
even soo the sonne quyckeneth whom
he woll.

22 Nether iudgeth the father enyman,
but hath committed all iudgment vnto
the sonne,

23 Be cause that all men shulde honoure
the Sonne, even as they honoure the
He that honoureth nott the
father.
Sonne, the same honoureth not the father
which hath sent hym.

24 Vyrcly, verely, I saye vnto you, he
that hearcth my wordcs, and beleveth
on hym that sent me, hathe everlast-
ynge lyfc, .and shall not come in to dam-
nacion, but is sca])cd from dcth vnto lyfe.
25 Verely, verely, I saye vnto you, the
tyme shall come, and nowe ys, when the
deed shall heare the voyce off tlic sonne
of God, and they that heare, shall live.

26 For as the father hath life in hym
silfe, soo lyke wyse liath he geven to
the sonne to have lyfe in hym silfe

11

li 2

1

;

468

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

27 And sealde him anweakl dset he
mcste deman, fordam de he is mannes
sunu.

28 Ne \vundrion ge daes, daet seo tid
cymjj, daet ealle gehyraj) his stefne, de
on byrgenum S3nd.

29 And da de god worhton, fara}> on
hfes sereste ; and da de yfel dydon, on
domes sereste. ''^

30 Ne mseg ic nan ])ing don fram me
sylfum, ic deme, swa swa ic gebyre, and
min dom is ryht, fordam ic ne sece
mmne willan, ac
daes de me
sende.

31 Gif ic gewitnesse be me cyde, min

gewitnes nis s6|)

32 O'der is se de cyj? gewitnesse be
me, and ic wat daet seo cydnes is soj?,
de he cy\> be me.

33 Ge sendon to lohanne, and he

cydde sojjftestnesse gewitnesse.

34 Ic ne onfo gewitnesse fram menu ;

ac dils |>ing ic secge, diet ge syn hale.

35 Yains was lukarn brinnando yah
\\> jus wildedu]> swignyan

liuhtyando ;
du wheilai in liuhada is.'*'

36 A|)|>an ik liaba weitwodijja maizcin
)>amma lolianne, }?o auk waurstwa ])oei
atgaf mis atta ei ik tauyau ])0, })0 waurst-
wa ]?oei ik tauya weitwodyand bi mik,
J)atci atta mik sandida.
37 Yah saei sandida mik atta, sah
weitwodeij) bi mik. Nih stibna is whan-
hun gahausidcduj), nih siun is gasewhu]).

35 He wais byrnende leoht-fiet and
lyhtende ; ge woldon sume hwile geblis-
sian on his leohte.

36 Ic hiebbe maran ge^^^tnesse donne
lohaunes, witodlice da wcorc de ftvdcr
me seakle daet ic hig fullfremme, da
weorc de ic wyrce cydajj gewitnesse be
me, da^t feder me asende.
37 And se faeder de me sende, cy\> ge-
witnesse be me. Ne ge naefre his stefne
ne gehyrdon, ne ge his hiw ne gesawon.

38 Yah waurd is ni habai[) wisando in
; ])ande ))anei insandida yains, Jjam-

"izwis
muh yus ni galaubei]\

38 And ge nabba|> liis word on cow
wunigcndc ; fordam de ge ne gclyfa|>,
dam de he sende.

39 Sn\eagea}) halige gewi'itu, fordam
de ge wena}) da^t ge liabbon ece bT on
dam ; and hig synd, de gewitnesse cydaj)
be me.

40 And ge nellaj) cuman to me, daet

ge habbon lif.

4

Ne underfo ic nane beorhtnesse set

mannum ;
42 Ac ic gccneow cow, dait ge nabbaj)

Godes lufe on eow.

1

1

;

;

V. 27-42.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

4G9

27 And he ^af to him power for to

make dom, for he is mannis sone.

28 Xyle 56 wondre this thing, for the
our Cometh, in which alle men that ben
in buriels, schulen heere the vois of
Goddis sone.

29 And thei that han do goode thingis,
schulen come forth in to rysinge a3en of
forsothe thei that han don yuele
lyf;
thingis, in to rysinge a^en of dom.

30 I may not of mysilf do ony thing,
but as I heere, I iuge, and my dom is
iust, for I seke not my vnWe, but the
will of the fadir that sente me.

31 If I here witnessing of my silf, my

witnessing is not trewe ;

32 Another is that berith witnessing
of me, and I woot for his witnessing is
trewe, that he berith of me.

33 3e senten to John, and he bar wit-

nessing to the treuthe.

34 Sothly I take not witnessing of
man ; but I seie thes thingis, that ^e
be saf.

35 Sothli he was a lanteme brennjmge
forsothe 50 wolden

and 8ch}Tiynge ;^
glade at oon our in his li3t.

36 Sothli I haue more witnessing than
John, forsoth the workis that my fadir
jaf to me that I perform e hem, the ilke
workis that I do beren witnessyng of
me, that the fadir sente me.

37 And the fadir that sente me, he bar
Nethir ^e herden
witnessing of me.
euere his vois, nethir say3cn his licnesse.^

38 And 36 han not his word dwellingc
in 30U ; for 30 bileuen not to him, whom
he sente.

39 Seke 36

in whiclie 30
gesscn to haue euerlastinge lyf; and tho
it ben, that beren witne.s.sing of me.

scripturis,

27 And hath geven hym power alsoo
to iudge, in that he is the sonne off
man.

•o^j

28 Mars'ayle nott at this, that the
houre shall come, in the whych all that
are in the graves, shall heare his voice,

29 And shall come forthe, they that
have done goode, vnto the resurreccion
off life ; and they that have done evyll,
vnto the resurreccion of dampnacion.

30 I can of myne awne silfe do noo
thynge at all, as I heare, I iudge, and
my iudgment ys iust, be cause I seke
nott myne awne wyll, butt the will off
the father which hath sent me.
31 Yf I beare witnes off my silfe, my
witnes ys nott true

32 There ys another thatt beareth
witnes off me, and I am sure that the
witnes whyche he beareth of me, is
true.

33 Ye sent vnto Jhon, and he bare

witnes vnto the trueth.

34 But I receave no recorde of man

neverthelesse these thynges I saye, that
ye myght be safe.
35 He was a burnynge and a shynynge
light ; and ye wolde for a season have
reioysed in his light.

36 But I have gretter witnes then the
witnes off Jhon, for the workes whych
my father hath geven me to fynnysshe,
the same workes whych I do beare wit-
nes off me, thatt my father sent me.
37 And my father hym silfe which
hath sent me, beareth witnes off me.
Ye have nott hcrde hys voice att cny
tyme, nor yett have sene hys shape.

38 And his wordcs have ye nott abyd-
ynge in you ; for ye bclcve not hym,
whom he hath sent.
39 Searche the scriptures, for in them
ye thynke ye have eternal lyfo ; and
they are they, whych testify off me.

40 And 3c wolcn not come to mc, that

40 And yctt will ye nott come to me,

50 haue lyf.

that ye myght have lyfc.

4

I take not clemesse of men ;

4

I rcccvc nott praysc off men ;

42 But I haue knowen 30U, for 3c han

not the louc of God in 30U.

42 Butt I knowc you, that ye have nott

the love off God in you.

470

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

43 Ic com on mines faeder naman, and
go me ne underfengon.
Gyf odcr cym|j
on his agenum naman, hyne ge under-
fojj.

44 Ilii mage ge gelyfan, de cow be-
tweonan wuldor underfo}^, and ne secaj)
cltct wuldor de is fram Gode syltum ]

45 Ne wene ge, da^t ic cow wrege to
fseder ; se is de cow wregj) Moyses, on
done ge gehyhtaj).

46 "Witodlice gif ge gclyfdon ^loysc,
soph'ce he wrat

ge gelyfdon eac me ;
be me.

47 Gif ge his stafum ne gelyfa}), hu

gelyfe ge minum wordum ?

45 .... .
izwis du attin ;
Moses, du j>ammei yus weneij>.^

|)atei ik wroliidcdyau
1st saei wroliida izwis

46 Yabai allis Mose galaubidedei)>, ga-
J)au-laul)idedei]) mis ; bi mik auk yaius
gamclida.

47 paiide nu yainis melam ni galaub-
ei|>, wliaiwa meiuaim waurdam galaub-
yaij)]

Chap. VI.

i Afar })ata galaij) Icsus
ufar mareiii ]>o Galeilaie, yali Tibairiade.

2 Yah laistida 'iiia managcins fihi ; unte
gasewhun taikuins, j^ozci gatawida bi
siukaim.

Chap. VI.

''^i ^Efter dyssum for se
Haclend ofer da Galileiscan sae, seo is
Tiberitidis.

2 And him fylide mycel folc ; fordani
de hig gcsdwon da tacna, de he "svorhte
on dam de wseron ge-untrumode.

3 Usiddya j^an ana fairguni Icsus, yah

yaiiiar gasat mij? siponyaui seiuaim.

3 Witodlice se Hselend astah on anne
munt, and saet dar mid his leorning-
cnilituin.

4 Wasuh Jjan uewha pascha, so dul|?s

4 Hit woes gehcnde castron, ludca

ludaie.

freols-da^ge.

5 paruh ushof augona lesus, yah ga-
iimida, ))aininci niaiiageins fihi iddya du
iiiuna, (ja})uli du Filip])au, Wliaju'o bug-
yam hhiibans, ei matyaiua |>ai 1

5 Da se Hsclcnd his eagan up-ahof,
and gcscah, da^t micel folc com to him,
he cwa?|) to rhilij)pc, Hwan* bicge we
hlafas, daet das eton 1

6 ])atuli

|ian

qa\>, fraisands ina ;

i|)

6 Da^t he cwoej), his fandigcndc ; ho

silba wissa j^atci habaida tauyau.

wiste hwa3t lie den wolde.

7 Andhof 'imma Filippus, Twaim hund-
am skat to Idaibos ni ganohai sind j)aini,
))ci nimai wharyizuh Icitil.

8 Qaj) ains |)ize siponyc "is, Andraias,

bro})ar Paitraus Scimonaus,

9 Jst ningula ains licr, saoi liabai|> .e.
hlaibans barizcinans yah .6. tiskaus ; akei
)>ata wha ist du swa managaim 1

10 J)) Icsus qa)), WaurkciJ) |ians mans
Wasuh |)an hawi manag

anakunibyan.

7 Da andwyrde him Pliilippus and
e\vaj|>, Nabbaj) hi genoh on twcgra hund-
red penega weorjje hlafes, dat a?lc sumue
da*l nyme.

8 Da andwyrde him an his leorning-
cnihta, Andreas, Simones broder Petres,
9 Her is an cnapa, de luvf)) fif l)crene
hlafas and twcgcn lixas ; ac hwat synd
da })ing betweox swa manegum man-
num ]

10 Da cwoe}> se Halcnd, D6j> dat daa
men sittou. On dare stowe was mycel

;

V. 43--VI. lo.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
43 I cam in tlie name of my fadir, and
If anotlier schal come
^e token not me.
in his owne name^ ^e schulen receyue
him.
44 How mown 56 bileue, that receyuen
glorie ech of other, and 50 seken not the
glorie that is of God aloone ]
45 Nyle 5e gesse, that I am to accus-
inge 50U anemptis the fadir ; it is Moyses
that accusith 30U, in whom 36 hopen.

46 Forsoth if ^e bileueden to Moyses,
peraiienture 30 schuklen bileue and to
me ; sothli he ^vl'oot of me.

47 Sothli if 36 beleuen not to his let-
to my

bileue

tris, how schulen
wordis '?

36

TYNDALE, 1526.

471
43 I am come in my fathers name, and
ye receave me not.
YfF another shall
come in hys awne name, hym wyll ye
receave.
. 44 Howe can ye b el eve, whycli receave
prayse won of another, and seke not the
prayse which commeth of God only 1

45 Suppose nott, that I wyll accuse
you to my father ; there is won that
accuseth you, verely Moses in whom ye
truste.

46 For had ye beleved Moses, ye wolde

have beleved me ; for he wrote of me.

47 But when ye beleve not hys writt-
ynge, howe shall ye beleve my wordes 1

I

'

J
I

Chap. VI.

i Aftir thes thingis Jhesu
wente ouer the se of Galilee, that is
Tiberiadis.

2 And a greet multitude suede him

for thei sy3en the tokenes, that he dide
on hem that weren syke.

Chap. VI.

i After that went Jesus
his waye over the see of Galile, nye to
a cite called Tiberias.

2 And a greate multitude folowed
hym ; because they hadde sene the myr-
acles, that he did on them which were
diseased.

3 Therfore Jhesu wente in to an hi],

3 Jesus went vp into a mountayne,

and there he sat with his disciplis.

and there he sate with his disciples.

4 Forsoth pask was ful ny3, a feeste

4 And ester, a feast of the lewes, was

day of Jewis.

nye.

5 Tlieifore whanne Jhesu hadd lyft vp
the y3en, and hadde seyn, for a greet
multitude cam to him, he seith to Philip,
AVherof schulen we bie loues, that thes
men etc "?

6 Sothli he seide this thing, temptingc
liim ; forsoth he wiste what he was to
doyn^'c.

7 Philip answeridc to him, The looucs
of two hundrid pens suffyscn not to
hem, that cch man take a litlc what.

5 Then Jesus lifte vppe hys eyes, and
sawe a greate company come vnto hym,
and sayde vnto Phillip, Whence shall
we bye breed, that these might eate 1

6 This he sayde, to prove hym ; for he

hym sylfe knewe what he wolde do.

7 Philip answered him, Two hondred
pcny worthe of breed are not sufHcicnt
for them, that every man have a litell.

8 Oon of his di8ci[)lis, Andrew, the
brother of Symount Pctio, seith to him,
9 O child is liorc, that hath fyuc barley
looues and twcyc fysches ; but wliat ben
thes thingis among so many men ]

8 Then sayde vnto hym won off hys
disciples, Andrew, Simon Peters brother,
9 There ys a laddc here, whych hath
fyve barly loves and two fisshes ; butt
what ys that amongc so many ?

10 Therfore Jhesu seith, Make 3c men
Forsoth there

for to sitte at the mete.

10 Jesus sayde, Make the pco])le to sit
There was moche grasse in the

dounc.

5
6
1
1

2

472

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SxVXON, 995.

[St. John

paruh anakumbi-
ana j^amma stacla.
dedun wairos, raJ)yon swaswc fimf j>us-
undyos.

grers.
manna.

Dicr sseton c!a, swylce fif jjusend

1

Naniuli j)an

jians hlaibans lesus,
yah awiliudonds, .... gadailida Jjaim
anakunibyandani, sanla^eil^o yah J^ize
fiske, swa filu swc wildcdun.

12 panuli h\\)e sadai waurjjun, qa|) du
siponyam seinaim, Galisi|) |)()s aflil'nand-
eius draulisnos, jjci waihtai ni fraqistnai.

13 panuh galcsiin, yah gafullidedun .ib.
tainyons gabruko us fimf Idaibam |)aiin
aflifiioda jjaim mat-
barizcinam, J>atei
yandam.

14 paruh }?ai mans, gasaiwhandans
jjoei gatawida taikn lesus, qej)un, patei
sa 1st bi sunyai praufetus, sa qimanda in
J>o manase}).

11 Se Haelend nam cJa

hhlfas, and
j'anc-wnrjjHce dyde, .... and hig to
decide dam sittendum, and eallswa of
dam fixum, swa mycel swa hig woldon.

1

Da hig fulle wacron, cla cwsej) lie to
his leorning-cnihtum, Gaderiaj) da bryt-
sena de dar tolufe waeron, diet hig ne
losion.

13 Hig gegaderodon, and fyldon twclf
wylian fulle da^ra brytsena of dam de
da Isefdon, de of dam fif bereuan Iilafon
aeton.

14 Da men cwsedon, da hig gesawon
dset he da^t tacen worlite, D?et des is scj?-
lice Witega, de on middan-geard cymj).

1

Ij) lesus kunnands, )?atci munai-
dedun usgaggan yah wilwan, ei tawide-
deina "ina du jjiudana, afiddya aftra in
fairguni is ains.

15 Da se Halend wiste, da^t hig wohl-
on cuman and hine gelieccan, and to
cynge don, da fleah he ana uppon done
munt.

1

I}> swe sei|)U war]?, atiddyedun sip-

16

onyos is ana niarein.

17 Yah usstigun in skip, iddyedunuh
Yah riqis
ufar marein in Kafarnaum.
yu|)an war]?, yah ni atiddya nauh|7an du
im lesus.

17 And da hig eodon on scyp,

hi
comon ofer da sse to Capliarnaum.
Hit
wear]) da ])ystre, and se Haelend ne com
to him.

18 Ij) marci, winda mikilamma wai-

18 ^fycel wind bleow, and Iiit wa^s

andin, urraisida was.

hrcoli Sir.

19 ])aiuh faryandans swe spaurde .k.
yah .e. ai)>|iau .1. gasaiwliand lesu gagg-
andan ana niarein, yah newha ski pa
qimandan ; yah ohtedun sis.

20 paruh is qa|>, Ikim ; ni ogei|> izwis.

19 AVitodlice da hig ha'fdon gcrowen
swylce twcntig furlanga odde |)rittig, da
gesawon hig done Hivlend nppan da're
sae g;in, and da^t he was gchende dam
scype ; and hi him ondredon.

20 He cwa'|) da to him, Ic hit com ;

ne ondracdaJ> cow.

2

paruh wihledun ina niman in skip,
yah sunsaiw jjata skip warj) ana aii])ai
ana |)oci eis iddyednn,

21 Hig woldon hyne niman on divt
scyp, and soiui dix?t scyp wajs jet dam
lande de hig woldon to faran.

22 Iftuniin daga managei, sci

stojj
liindar niarein, sewhun, j^atei skip an-
ain, yah
ni qani siponyam seinaim
|)atei
lesus in jjata skip, ak ainai siponyos

yainar

was

alya

j^ar

ni

mi|>

22 S6|)lice odrc da>ge seo menigeo, de
stod bcgcondan dam mere, gescali, diet
dar na?s biitou an scyp,

and da?t sc Haelend ne code on scjqi mid

9
2
1

VI. 11-22.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

473

was myche hey in tlie place.
Therfore
men saten at the mete, in noumbre as
fyue thousandis.

1

Therfore Jhesu took fjTie looues,

and whanne he hadde do thankingis, .
... he departide to men sittinge at
mete, also and of the fischis, as myche
as thei wold en.

.

1

Forsothe as thei ben fillid, he seide
to his disciplis, Gedere 5e the relyfs that
ben left, that thei perischen not.

13 Therfore thei gedriden, and filleden
twelue coffyns of relyfs of the fyue
barly looues and tweye fischis, that leften
to hem that haddun etun.

14 Therfore tho men, whanne thei
hadden seyn the tokene''' that he hadde
don, seyden. For this is verily the pro-
phete, that is to comynge in to the
world.

15

Therfore whanne Jhesu

hadde
knowun, for thei weren to comynge that
thei schulden rauysche him, and make
him kyng, he aloone fledde eft in to an
hil.

16 Sothli as euentyd was maad, his

disciplis went en doun to the see.

17 And whanne thei hadden sti^ed vp
in to the boot, thei camen ouer the see
And derknessis
in to Capharnaum.
weren now maad, and Jhesu hadde not
com en to hem.

18 Forsothe a greet wynde blowynge,

And the men sate doune, in

place.
nombre about five thousand e.

11 Jesus toke the breed, and gave
thankes, and gave to his disciples, and
his disciples to them that were sett
doune, and likwyse of the fysshes, as
moche as they wolde.

12 When they had eten ynough, he
sayde vnto his disciples. Gadder vppe
the broken meate that remayneth, that
nothinofe be loost.

13 They gaddered it togedder, and
filled twelve basketes wyth the broken
meate of the five barly loves, which
broken meate remayned vnto them that
had eaten.

14 Then those men, when they had
sene the myracle that Jesus did, sayde,
This is off" a trueth the same prophet,
which shall come into the worlde.

15 Jesus knew wele ynough, that they
wolde come and take hym vppe, to
make hym kynge, and therfore dej^arted
he agayne into a mountayne hymsilfe
a lone.

16 When even was come, his disciples

went vnto the see.

17 And entred into a shyppe, and
see vnto Capernaum.
went over the
And anon it was darcke, and Jesus was
not come to them.

18 And the see arose, with a greate

the see roos vp.

wynde.

1

Tlierfore whanne thei hadden rowid
as fyue and twenty furlongis or thritty,
thei seen Jhesu walkingc on the see,
and to be maad next to the boot ; and
thei dreddcn.

20 Sothli he seyde to hem, I am ; nyle

19 When they had rowed aboute a
XXV. or a xxx. furlonges, tliey sawe
Jesus walke on the see, and to drawe
nye vnto the shyppe ; and they were
afrayed.

20 He sayd vnto them, Itt is I ; be

5e drede.

nott a frayde.

21 Therfore thei wolden take him in
to tlic boot, and anon tho ])oot was at
the lond in to which thei wcnten.

22 On the totliir day the cumpanyc,
tliat stood ouor the sec, Ry3, for there
was non oiliir boot there no but oon,
and for Jhesu cntride not witli liis dis-
ciplis in to the boot, l)ut his discijiHs

21 Then wolde they have rcceaved
liym into the ship])C, and the shi]>pe
was by and by at the londe whythcr
they went.

22 The dayc folowyngc the pooj)lo,
which stode on the other syde of tho
see, sawe, that there was none other
shyppe there save that won whcr in his
disciples were entred, and that Jesus

;

1

;

474

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

is gaUjjun.

23 An|)ara );an skipa qcmun us Tibai-
riadau newha |>amma stada, jjarei mat-
idedun lilaif, ana pammei awiliudoda
Frauya.

24 paruh |)an gasawli managei, ))atei
lesus nist yainar, nih siponyos is, ga-
stigun "in skipa, yah qcmun in Kafar-
naum, sokyandaus Icsu.

his leorning-cnihtum, ac hia leorning-
cnihtas sylfe ana foron.

23 O'dre scypu comon fram Tiberiadc
wid da stowe, dar hig done hlaf seton,
Drihtne j^anciende.

24 T)a SCO menigeo geseah, dset

se
Haelend dar n?es, ne his leorninfj-cniht-
as, da eodon hig on scipu, and comon
to Capharnaum, sohton done Htclend.

25 Yah bigctun ina hindar marein,
qe|)unuh du imnia, llabbei, whan her
qarat ]

25 And da hig gemetton hyne bc-
geondan dam mere, hig cwaedon to him,
Lareow, hwsenne com du hider ]

26 Andhof im lesus, yah qa)), Amen,
amen, qi)?a izwis, sokeijj mik, ni jjatei
sewliuj) taiknins yah fauratanya, ak jjatei
matideduj) J)izc hlaibe, yah sadai waurj)-

u\,.

27 Waurkyai]? ni })ana mat f>ana frahis-
auan, ak mat J^ana wisandan du liljainai
aiweinon, |?anei sunus mans gibi]? izwis
Jjanuh auk atta gasiglida Guj?.

26 Se Heelend him andswarode, and
cwoej). So}?, ic secge eow, ne sece ge me,
fordam de ge tacnu gesawon, ac fordam
de ge seton of dam hlufon, and synd
fulle.+

27 Ne w)Tca|> jefter dam mete de for-
wyrj), ac tvfter dam do |mrh-wuna|) on
ece lif, done mannes sunu eow sylj>
done God feeder getacnode.

28 paruh qe|)un du imraa, Wha tau-
yaima, ei waurkyaima waurstwa GuJ?s 1

28 Hig cwsedon to him, Hw?et do we,

dfet we wyrceon Godes weorc 1

29 Andhof lesus, yah qa)) du im, pat-
ist waurstw Gu|)S, ei galaubyai|>, J^ammei
insandida yains.

30 Qe})un du imma, Ajjjjan wha tauyis
})u taikne, ei saiwliaima, yah galaub-
yaima jms? wlia waurkcis"?

31 Attans unsarai manna matidedun
ana au|>idai, swaswe ist gamelij), Hlaif us
himina guf im du matyan.

32 paruh qa|) im lesus, Amen, amen,
qijja izwis, ni Moses gaf izwis hlaif us
liimina, ak atta meins gaf izwis hlaif
us himina j^ana sunycinan ;

33 Sa auk hlaifs Gul)S ist saei atstaig
us liimina, yah gaf libain |?izai man-
asedai.

29 Da andswarode se Haelend, and
cwa*)? to him, Da?t is Godes weorc, daet
ge gelyfon on done, de he sende.

30 Da cwaedon hig, Hwa3t dest du to
tacne, di\3t we geseon, and gelyfon, da^t
du hit wyrce 1

3

U're ficderas seton heofonlicne mete
on westene, swa hit awriten is. He
scalde him etan hlaf of hcofone.

32 Se Hselcnd cwa?}) to him, Soj), ic
secge eow, ne sealde Moyses eow hhif
of heofonum, ac min faeder eow syl]>
s6))ne hlaf of hcofenum ;

33 Hit is Godes hlaf de of heofcne

com, and sylj? middan-earde h'f.

34 panuh qejmn du imnia, Frauya,

34 Ilig cwsedon to him, Drihtcn, syle

framwigis gif unsis Jnina hlaif.

35 Yah qa}) du im lesus?, Jk im sa
j^aiia gaggandan du mis,
hlaifs libainais ;
ni huggreij) ; yah |)ana galaubyandau du
mis, ni jjaurscij? whanhun.

us dysne hlaf.

35 Se Hivlcnd cwa^|> to liim, Ic eom
lifos hlaf; ne hingraj) done, de to me
cym)) ; and ne ]>yvst done nacfre, de on
me gelyf)).

VI. 23-35.] WYCLIFrE,i389.

TYNDALE,i526.

475

aloone wenten.

23 Forsothe othere bootis camen fro
Tiberiade bisydis the place, where thei
eeten breed, doynge thankingis to God.

24 Therfore whanne the cumpany
hadden seyn, for Jhesu was not there,
nethere his disciplis, thei sti^eden in
to bootis, and camen to Capharnaum,
sekinge him.

25 And whanne thei hadden founden
him oner the see, thei seyden to him,
Raby, hou hast thou com hidur 1

26 Jhesu answeride to hem, and seyde,
Treuli, treuli, I seie to 50U, 30 seken me,
not for 5e sy5 the tokenis,'*' but for 30
eeten of looues, and ben fiUid.

27 Worche ^e not mete that perischith,
but that dwellith in to euerlastinge lyf,
which mete mannis sone schai 5yue to
30U ; forsothe God the fadir bitokenede^
him.

28 Therfore thei seiden to him. What
schulen we do, that we worche the
workis of God ?

29 Jliesu answeride, and seide to hem,
This is the work of God, that je bileue
in to him, whom lie sente.

30 Therefore thei seiden to him, Ther-
fore what tokene doist thou, that we se,
and bileue to thee 1 what worchist thou 1
31 Oure fadris eeten manna in desert,
as it is writun, He ^af to hem breed fro
heuene for to ete.

32 Therfore Jhesu seith to hem, Treuli,
treuli, I seie to 50U, not Moyses ^af to
30U very breed fro heuene, but my fadir
3yucth to 30U ven-i breed fro heuene ;

33 Sothli it is verri ])reed that cometh
doun fro heuene, and 3yucth lyf to the
world.

34 Therfore thei seiden to him, Lord,

euere 3yuc to vs this breed.

35 Sotlily JhcHU Rcidc to licm, I am
breed of lyf; he that cometh to me,
Bchal not Imngrc ; he that bilcueth in
me, scbal ncucre thirste.

went nott in with them into the shippe,
butt that hys disciples were gone awaye
alone.

23 There cam other shippes from Ti-
berias nye vnto the place, where they
ate breed, when the Lorde had blessed.

24 Then when the people sawe, that
Jesus was not there, nether hys dis-
ciples, they also toke shippynge, and
cam to Caparnaum, sekinge for Jesus.

25 And when they had founde hym on
the other syde of the see, they sayd
vnto hym, Master, when earnest thou
bidder?

26 Jesus answered them, and sayde,
Verely, verely, I saye vnto you, ye seke
me, nott be cause ye sawe the myracles,
but be cause ye ate of the breed, and
were filled.

27 Laboure not for the meate which
perissheth, but for the meate that en-
duretli vnto everlastynge lyfe, whiche
meate the sonne of man shall geve vnto
for hym hath God the father
you ;
sealed.

28 Then sayde they vnto hym. What
shall we do, that we myght worke the
workes of God ?

29 Jesus

answered, and sayd vnto
them. This is the worke of God, that ye
beleve on him, whom he hath sent.

30 They sayde vnto hym. What signe
shewest thou then, that we maye se, and
beleve the 1 what doest thou worke ?

31 Oure fathers did eate manna in the
desert, as yt ys written. He gave them
breed from hevcn to eate.

32 Jesus sayde vnto them, Verely,
verely, I saye vnto you, ISIoses gave you
not breed from hcven, but my father
geveth you the true breed from heven ;
33 For he is the breed of God which
commeth doune from heven, and geveth
lyfe vnto the worlde.

34 Then sayde they vnto hym, Master,

ever moore geve vs tliis breed.

3,r; And Jesus sayde vnto them, I am
that breed of lyfe ; he that connncth to
me, hIuiU not hongcr ; and lie that be-
Icvcth on me, shall never thurst.

476

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

36 Akei qa|> izwis, j^atei gasewliuj) mik,

yah ni fjaluubci}?.

37 All,

})atei gaf mis atta, du mis
qimijj ; yah |)ana gaggaiidau du mis, ni
uswairpa ut.

38 Unte atstaig us himina, nih |)cci
tauyau wilyan meiiiana, ak wilyau |ns
sandyandins mik.

39

36 Ac ic eow sa?de, daet ge gesawon

me, and ne gelyfdon.
37 Eall, daet fseder me syl|\, cym}> to
me ; and ic ne weorpe lit dune, de to
me cymj).

38 Fordam de ic ne com of hcofcnum,
diet ic minne willan do, ac dius willan
de me sende.
39 Dast is djBS faeder willa de me sende,
dset ic nan})ing ne forleose of dam, de
he me sealde, ac awecce diet on dam
ytemestan dsege.

40 patuh ))an 1st wilya l^is sandyandins
mik, ei whazuh saei saiwhij) jjana sunu,
yah galaubeij? du I'mma,
libain
aiweinon ; yah urraisya ina *ik in sped-
istin daija.

aigi

41 Birodidedun ))an ludaieis bi ina,
unte qa|7, Ik im hlaifs sa atsteigands us
himina.

42 Yah qe|)un, Niu sa i'st lesus, sa
sunus loscfis, |)izei weis kun})cdum attan
yah ail^ein? Whaiwa nu qij'ijj sa, patei
us himina atstaig 1

40 Dis is mines faeder willa de me
sende, daet aelc de done sunu ,fr^sy^'|%
and on hine gelyf}?, haebbe ece lif ; and
ic hine awecce on dam ytemestan daege.

41 Da murcnodon da ludeas be him,
fordam de he cwae]>, Ic com hlaf de of
heofenum com.

42 And hig cwaedon, Hii nis dis se
Haelend, losepes sunu, we cunnon his
faeder and his moder ] Hunieta segj) des,
Ic com of heofenum 1

43 Andhof J?an lesus, yah qaj) du im,

Ni birodeij) mij? izwis misso.

44 Ni manna mag qiman at mis, nibai
atta saei sandida mik, atjjinsi)? ina ; yah
ik urraisya ina in j^amma spedistin daga.

45 1st gameli)> ana praufetum, Yah
Whazuh
"vvairjjand allai laisidai Gujjs.
nu sa gahausyands at attin, yah ganam,
gaggij) du mis,

46 Ni |)atei attan sewhi whas, nibai

43 Se Hselend him andswarode, and
cwae|' to him, Ne murcnia}) eow be-
tweonan.'''

44 Ne maeg nan man cuman to nie,
biiton se faeder de me sende, hyne teo ;
and ic hine araere on dam ytemestan
daege.

45 On daera wltegena bocum is a\vriten,
^E'lc de ge-
Ealle eadlaere beo}> Godes.
hyrde xt fasder, and leornode, cym|> to
me.

46 Ne geseah nan man fa»der, buton

saei was fram attin, sa sawh attan.

se de is of Godc, se gesyhj) faeder.

47 Amen, amen, qi|ia izwis, saei ga-

laubeij) du mis, aih libain aiweinon.

47 S6|>, ic sccge eow, se haef}> ece lif,

dc on me gelyt]>.

48 Ik im sa hlaifs libainais.
49 Attans izwarai matidedun manna in

48 Ic eom lifes hlaf.
49 U're faederas aeton hcofcnlicnc mete

au})idai, yah gaswultun.

on wcstene, and hig synd dcade.

50 Sa ist hlaifs saei us himina atstaig,

50 Dis is se hlaf de of hcofcnum com,

ci saei jjis matyai, ni gadaujuai.

dajt ne swelte, se de of him ytt.

51 Ik im hlaifs sa libanda, sa us himina
qumana. Yabai whas matyij) |)is hlaibis,
Yah )n\n sa hlaifs
libaij) in ayukdu)>.

5 1 Ic eom lybbende hlaf, de of heofenum
Swa hwa swa ytt of dyson hlafe,
And se hlaf de

com.
he leofa)> on ecnysse.

VI. 36-51] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYND ALE, 1526.

477

36 But I seide to 50U, for and ^e han

seyn me, and 36 bileueden not.
37 Al thing, that the fadir 5yueth to
me, schal come to me ; and I schal not
caste out him, that cometh to me.

38 For I cam doun fro heuene, not
that I do my wille, but the wille of him
that sente me.

39 Forsothe this is the wille of him
that sente me, the fadris, that al thing
that the fadir ^af to me, I leese not of
it; but a3en reise it in the laste day.

40 Sothly this is the wille of my fadir
that sente me, that ech man that seeth
the sone, and bileueth in to him, haue
euerlasting lyf ; and I schal a^en reyse
him in the laste day.

41 Therfore Jewis grucchiden of him,
for he hadde seyd, I am breed that cam
doun fro heuene.

42 And thei seiden, Wher this is not
Jhesu, the sone of Joseph, whos fadir
and modir we han knoAvun?
Therfore
bou seith this, I cam doun fro heuene 1

43 Therfore Jhesu answeride, and seide

to hem, JSTyle ^e grucche to gidere.

44 No man may come to me, no but
the fadir that sente me, schal drawe
him ; and I schal a3en reyse him in the
laste day.

45 It is writun in prophetis, And alle
men schulen ben able to be tau3t of
Ech man that herde of the fadir,
God.
and lernede, cometh to me.

46 Not for ony man sy3 the fadir,
no but this that is of God, this syj
the fadir.

47 Sothli, sothli, I seye to 30U, he that

bileueth in me, hath euerlasting lyf.

48 I am the breed of lyf.
49 3oure fadris eeten manna in desert,

and ]>en deede.

50 Tins is breed coniyngc doun fro
heuene, tliat if ony man schal etc therof,
he deyeth not.

51 I am quyk breed, tliat cam doun
If ony man schal etc of
fro heuene.
this bred, he schal lyuc with outen ende.

36 Butt I saye vnto you, that ye have

sene me, and yett beleve ye not.
3 7 All, that my father geveth me, coni-
meth to me ; and hym that commeth
to me, cast I not out at the dores.

38 For I cam doune from heven, nott
to do myne awne will, butt his will
whiche hathe sent me.
39 And this is my fathers will which
hath sent me, that of all which he hath
geven me, I shulde loose noo thynge,
but shulde rayse it vp agayne at the
last daye.

40 And this is the wyll off hym that
sent me, that every man whych seith
the Sonne, and beleveth on hym, have
everlastynge lyfe ; and I wyll rayse
hym vp att the last daye.

41 The levfes murmured att itt, be-
cause he sayde, I am thatt breed which
is come doune from heven.

42 And they sayde. Is nott this Jesus,
the Sonne of Joseph, whose father and
mother we knowe? Howe ys yt then
thatt he sayeth, I cam doune from
heven 1

43 Jesus answered, and sayde vnto
them, Murmur not betwene youre selves.

44 No man can come to me, except
my father which hath sent me, drawe
hym ; and Y will rayse hym vp at the
last daye.

45 Hit is written in the prophetes.
And they shall all be taught of God.
Every man which hath herde, and
learned of the father, commeth vnto me.
46 Not that eny man hath sene the
father, save he which is off God, the
same hath sene the father.

47 Verely, verely, I saye vnto you, he
that beleveth on me, hath everlastynge
lyfe.

48 I am that l^rccd of lyfe.
49 Youre fathers did eate manna in
the wilderncs, and are deed.

50 This is that breed which commeth
from heven, that he wich off it catctli,
shulde also not deye.

f,! I am that livynge breed, which cam
Yf eny man cate
live for ever.

doune from heven.
of this l>rccd, ho shall

478

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Joiix

jjanei 'ik giba, leik mein 1st, |)iitcl ik giba
ill |>izos mauasedais libaiiiais.

ic s}lle, is min flaesc for middan-cardes

life.

J)

52 panuli sokun mi

sis misso ludaicis,
qi}>andaiis, "Whaiwa mag sa unsis leik
giban du matyan 1
53 paruh qaj) du im lesus, Amen,
amen, qi|ja izwis, nibai matyij) leik ))is
sunaus mans, yah driggkai)) is bio]?, ni
habai}) libain in izwis silbam.

52 Da ludeas fliton him betweonan,
and cwaedon, Hu mseg des his Hlcsc
us syllan to etanne"?

53 Da c\\x]> se Ilaclend to him,''' S6[),
ic secge eow, usebbe ge lif on eow, buton
ge eton mannes suna fliCsc, and his blod
drincon.

54 Saei matyi)? mein leik, yah driggkij)
mein bloj?, aili libain aiweinon, yah ik
urraisya ina in ]>amma spedistin daga.

54 Se hoef|7 ece lif, de ytt min flaesc,
and drincj) min blod, and ic hine arsere
on dam ytemestan da^ge.

55 pata auk leik meinata bi sunyai ist
mats, yah j-ata blo|) mein bi sunyai ist
draggk.

56 Saei matyi)? mein leik, yah driggki}>
mein bloj?, in mis wisi]), yah ik in imma.

55 Sojjlice min flaesc is mete, and min

blod ys drinc.

56 Se de ytt min flaesc, and drinej) min

blod, he wunaj) on me, and ic on him.

57 Swaswe insandida mik libands atta,
yah ik liba in attins, yah saei matyij?
mik, yah sa libaij? in meina.

58 Sa ist hlaifs, saei us himina atstaig.
Ni swaswe matidedun attans izwarai
manna, yah gadau|)no(ledun ;
saei
matyij) jjana hlaif, libaij? in ayukdu}).

i\)

59 pata qaj) in swnagoge, laisyands in

Kafarnaum.

57 Swa swa lybbende faeder me sende,
and ic lybbe |)urh fieder, and se de me
ytt, he leofiij) Jjurh me.

58 Dis is se hlaf, de of heofenum com.
Na swa swa lire fsederas aeton heofen-
licne mete, and deade waeion ; se de
ytt dysne hlaf, he leofa)? on ecnysse.

59 Das J)ing he saede on gesamnunge,

da he leerde on Capharnaum.

60 panuh managai gahausyandans |?ize
siponye is, qejjun, Hardu ist ))ata waurd,
whas mag j)is hausyon 1

60 Manega his leorning-cnihta cwaedon,
da big dis gehyrdon. Heard is dcos
spraec, hwa maeg hig gehyran]

61 I)> witands Ifesus in sis silbin, |)atei
birodidedun jjata |)ai si})onyos is, qaj) du
im, pata izwis gamarzeij) 1

61 Da wiste se Haelend, da^t his leorn-
ing-ciiihtas murcnedon betweox him
sylfum be dysum, and he cw£e|? to him,
Divt cow beswic}) ?

62 Yabai nu gasaiwhi}) sunu mans

62 Gif ge geseoj) mannes sunu astig-

ussteigan, ];adei was faur|)is?

endne, daer he acr wres ?

63 Ahma ist saei liban tauyij),

])ata
\>o waurda |)oei
leik ni boteij) waiht ;
ik rodida izwis, ahma ist yah libains
ist.

64 Akci sind Vzwara sumai J>aiei ni
Wissuh )ian us frumist-
galaubyand.
ya losus, wharyai sind ))ai ni gahiub-
yandans, yah whas ist saei galciweij)
ina.

65 Yah qa)>, Du|)e qaj) izwis, j)atei ni
ainslum mag qiman at mis, nibai ist

63 Gast is se de gelifffest,

flaesc nc
frema)) n;in|)ing ; da word de ic eow
saede, synd giist and lif.

64 Ac sume ge ne gelyfajn

Witodlice
se Hnclcnd wiste fram fruman. InwTt da
gelyfendan waeron, and hwa hine belaew-
an wolde.

65 And he cwa^]?, Fordig ic eow saede,
da?t niln man ne mieg cuman to me,

VI. 52-65] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
And the breed that I schal 5yue, is my
fleisch for lyf of the world.

52 Therfore the Jewis chidden to gi-
dere, seyinge, Hou may this 5}Tie to vs
his fleisch for to ete 1

53 Therfore Jhesu seith to hem, Treuly,
treuli, I seye to 30U, no but 3e schulen
ete the fleisch of mannis sone, and
drynke his blood, 36 schulen not haue
lyf in 50U.

54 He that etithmy fleisch, and drjmk-
eth my blood, hath euerlasting lyf, and
I schal a3en reyse him in the laste day.

55 Forsoth my fleisch is verily mete,
and my blood is verily diynke.

56 He that etith my fleisch, and drynk-
ith my blood, dwellith in me, and I in
him.
57 As my fadir lyuynge sente me, and
I lyue for the fadir, and he that etith
me, schal lyue for me.

58 This is breed, that cam doun fro
Not as 3oure fadris eeten
heuene.
manna, and ben deed ; he that etith
this breed, schal lyue with outen ende.
59 He seide thes thingis in the syna-
goge, techinge in Capharuaum.
60 Therfore manye of his

disciplis
heeringe, scyden, This word is hard,
who may heere him ]

61 Forsoth Jhesu witynge anemptis
him silf, for his disciplis grucchiden of
this thing, seide to hem. This thing
Bclaundrith 30U 1

62 Therfore if 36 schulen se mannis

sone sti3ynge vp, wher he was bifore 1

63 It is the spirit that quykcncth, the
floysch profiteth nothing ; the wordis
that I haue spokun to 30U, ben spirit
and lyf.

64 But ther ben summc of 30U that
Sothli Jiicsu wistc at the
bileucn not.
bigynnynge, whiclic wcrcu biieuyngc,
and who was to bitrayingc him.

-

TYNDALE, 1526.

479
And the breed that I will geve, is my
flesshe, which I will geve for the lyfe
of the worlde.

52 The lewes strove amonge them
selves, sayinge, Howe can this felowe
geve vs his flesshe to eate 1

^^ Jesus sayde vnto them, Verely,
verely, I saye vnto you, except ye eate
the flesshe off" the sonne of man, and
drynke his bloude, ye shall not have
lyfe in you.
54 Whosoever eateth my flesshe, and
drynketh my bloudde, the same hath
eternall lyfe, and I will rayse hym vp
at the last daye.

55 For my flesshe is meate in dede,

and my bloudde is drynke in dede.

56 He thatt eateth my flesshe, and
drynketh my bloudde, dwelleth in me,
and I in hym.
57 As my lyvynge father hath sent
me, even soo lyve I by my father, and
he that eateth me, shall live by me.

58 This is the breed, which cam from
heven. Nott as youre fathers have eaten
manna, and are deed ; he that eateth
of this breed, shall live ever.

59 These thinges sayd he in the sina-

goge, as he taught in Capernaum.

60 Many of his disciples when they
had herde this, sayd. This is an herde
sayinge, who can abyde the hearynge
of it ?

61 Jesus knew in hym silfe, that his
disciples murmured at hit, and sayde
vnto them, Doth this off'eude you ^

62 Wliat and if ye shall se the sonne
off* man ascendc vp, where he was be-
fore 1

63 It is the sprcte that ([uyckencth,
the
the flesshe
wordcs that I speake vnto you, are
sprcte and lyfe.

noth} ngc ;

proffbtcth

64 r>ut there are some off you that
For Jesus knewc from tlic
bclcve not.
begynnyngc, which they were that bc-
leved not, and who shulde betraye hym.

65 And he Bcide, Therfore I seide to
3011, that no man may come to mc, no

65 And he sayde, Therfore sayd I vnto
you, that no man can come vnto me,

1

1

480

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

atiriban imma fram attiii meinamma.

buton miu faider hit him sylle.

66 Uzuh J)amma rnela managai gali|)un
mi|)

siponye is ibukai, yah ]?anaseij)S
imma iii iddyedun.

67 paruli qaj) lesus du jjaim twalibim,

Ibai yah yus wileij; galei})an 1

68 panuh audhof imma Seimon Paitrus,
Frauya, du whamina galeipaima? Waurda
libainais aiweinons habais ;

69 Yah weis galaubidedum, yah uf-
kunjiedum, j^atei \>u. is Christus, suiius
Gu|)S libandins.

70 Andhof im lesus, Niu ik izwis .ib.
gawalida, yah izwara aiiis diabaulus ist 1

7

Qajjuh |)an j^ana ludan Seimonis,
Iskariotu, sa auk habaida ina galewyan,
aius wisands ])ize twalibe.

66 Syddan manega his leorning-cnihta

cyrdon onba3C, and no eodon mid him.

67 Da cwsej) se Hselend to dam twelfum,
Cwede ge wylle ge fram me ?

68 Da andwyrde him Simon Petrus
and cwa^j), Driliten, to hwam ga wc 1
Du hoefst eces lifes word ;
69 And we gelyfa}), and witon, djet dil

eart Crist, Godes sunu.

70 Se Haelend him andswarode and
cwae)?, Hii ne geceas ic eow twelfe, and
eower an is deofol ]

7

And he hyt cwse}) be luda Scarioj^e,
des hine belsewde, da he wses

an dara twelfa.

Chap. VII.

i Yah wharboda lesus
afar jjata in GaleiUiia, ni auk wilda in
ludaia gaggan, uute sokidedun ina })ai
ludaieis usqiman.

Chap. VIL ^i Syddan f6r se Heel-
end to Galilea, he nolde faran to ludea,
fordam de da ludeas hine sohton and
woldon hyne ofslean.

2 AVasuh |)an newha duljs ludaie, so

2 Hit wa3S gehende ludca frcols-dcege.

Hle|>rastakeins.
3 panuli qe))un du imma bro|)ryus is,
|)a|5ro, yah gagg in ludaian, ei
U.slei}>
yah |)ai siponyos saiwhaina waurstwa
]?eina j)oei ))U tauyis ;

4 Ni manna auk in anahuignein wlia
tauyij), yah sokeib sik uskunjjana wisan.
Yabai ^ata tauyis, bairhtei ])uk silban
})izai manasedai.

3 His brodro cwscdon to him. Far
heonon, and ga on ludea land, da^t dine
leorninij-cnihtas ijeseon da weorc de dii
wyrcst ;

4 Ne dt'}) nan man nan)>ing on dfglum,
Gif dii das
ac setj> diet hit oj)en sy.
]?ing dost, gcswutcla de sylfue middan-
earde.

5 Ni auk jjai broj^ryus is galaubidodun

5 Witodlice ne his magas ne gclyfdon

inuna.

6 paruh qaj) im lesus, Mel mein ni
nauli ist, ij^ mel izwar sinteino ist manwu.

7 Ni mag so manasejjs fiyan izwis, i|)
mik fiyai}> ; unto ik weitwodya bi ins,
jjatei waurstwa ize ubihi sind

on hine.

6 Da cwaej) se Hselcnd to him, Gyt
ne com min tid, cower tid is symlc
gearu.

7 Ne mai'g middan-eard eow hatian, ac
he liataj) me ; fordam ic cyde gewituesse
be him, diet his weorc synd yfele.

8 Yus gaU^ij>i}) in dul]) \>o,

ij> ik 11 i
nauh gak'il'a in \>o dulj), unte meinata
mel ni nauh usfuUi}) ist.

9 patuh I'an qa)> du im, wisands in

8 Fare ge to disum freols-da\ge, ic ne
fare to disum freols-da^gc, fordam min
tid nis gyt gefylled.

9 He wunode on Galilea, da he das

Galcilaia.

I'ing s?ede.

10 Ij)

l)i])C galijmn jnii brojn-yus is,

10 Eft da Lis brodru foron^ da for

;

;

1

;

:

VI. 66.-VII. lo.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
but it were 5ouun to him of my fadir.

66 Fro this tyme manye of his dis-
ciplis wenten a bak, and now wenten
not with him.

67 Therfore Jhesu seide to the twelue,

Where and 56 wolen go awey ]

68 Therfore Symount Petre answeride
to him, Lord, to whom schulen we go ?
Thou hast wordis of euerelasting lyf

69 And we han bileuyd, and knowun,

for thou art Crist, the sone of God.

70 Therfore Jhesu answeride to hem,
Wher I chees not 50U twelue, and oon
of 30U is a deuel ?

7 I Forsothe he seide of Judas of Sy-
mount, of Scarioth, forsoth this was to
bitraiyiige him, whanne he was oon of
twelue.

TYNDALE, 1526.

481

except it were geven vnto hym of my
father.

66 From that tyme many of his dis-
ciples went a waye from him, and com-
panyed no moore with hym.

67 Then sayde Jesus to the twelve,

Will ye alsoo goo awaye ?

68 Simon Peter answered hym, Master,
to whom shall we goo 1 Thou haste the
wordes off eternall lyfe

69 And we have beleved, and knowen,
that thou arte Christ, the sonne off the
lyvynge God.

70 Jesus answered them, Have not I
chosen you twelve, and yett one off you
is the devyll 1

7

He spake it off Judas Iscariot, the
Sonne of Simon, for he itt was that
shulde betraye hym, and was one of the
twelve.

Chap. VII.

1 Forsothe aftir thes
thiugis Jhesu walkide in to Galilee, for
he wolde not walke in to Judee, for the
Jewis sou3ten for to sle him.

Chap. VII.

i After that Jesus went
Galile, and wolde not goo
about in
about in lewry, for the lewes soughtt
to kyll hym.

2 Sothli ther was in the nexte a feeste

2 The lewes Tabernacle feast was at

day of Jewis, Scenofegia.'''

honde.

3 Forsothe his bretheren seiden to him,
Passe fro hennis, and go in to Judee,
that and thi disciplis se thi werkis that
thou doist

4 Forsothe no man doth ony thing in
hid place, ^ and he sekith to be in to opyn.
If thou dost thes thingis, schcwe thi silf
to the world.

5 Forsothe nether his britheren bi-

leucden in to him.

6 Therfore Jhesu seith to hem, My
time cam not ^it, but joure tyme is
euermore redy.

7 The world may not haue hatid 30U,
sothli it hatith me ; for I here witness-
for the workis of it ben
ing therof,
yuele.

8 Sti^c 30 vp at this fccste day, but
I schal not 8ti3e vp at this feeste day,
for my tyme is not 3it HUid.

9 Whanne lie liaddc scid thes thingis,

he dwclte in Galilee.

10 Forsothe as liis britheren sti3odcn

3 His brethren therfore sayde vnto
hym, Gett thy silfe hence, and goo into
lewry, that thy disciples maye se thy
workes that thou doest

4 There is no man tnat doeth eny
thynge secretly, and he hym silfe seketh
to be knowen. Yf thou do soche thynges,
shewe thy silfe to the worlde.

5 For as yet his brethren beleved not

in hym.
6 Then Jesus sayd vnto them. My
tyme is not yett come, youre tyme ia
all waye redy.
7 The worlde can not hate you, me it
hateth ; be cause I testyfy off hitt, thatt
the workes off itt are evyll.

8 Goo ye vppc vnto this feast, I will
nott goo vppe yett vnto this feaste, for
my tyme is nott yett full come.

9 These wordes he sayde vnto them,

and aboode still in Galile.

10 As sone as his brethren were goono

1

i

1

482

;

1

;

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

jianuh
aiidaugyo, ak swe analaugniba.

galai})

in

yali

is

]>o

dulji, ni

1

panuli ludaicis sokidedim ina 'in
]?izai dulj)ai, yah qc})un, AVhar ist yains ?
12 Yah birodcius mikila was 111 man-
Sumaih qe]?un, patci sunycins
agein.
'ist ; an))arai qe]mn, Ne, ak airzeij? |)0

13 Nih jjan ainsnun swej^auh balj?aba

rodida bi 'ina, in agisis ludaie.

14 Ij) yu})an ana midyai dul]?, usstaig

lesus in alh, yah laisida.

15 Yah sildaleikidedun manageins, qij?-
andans, Whaiwa sa bokos kann, unus-
laisi]>s ?

16 Andhof ))an lesus, yah qa]?, So
meina laiseins nist meina, ak )?is sand-
yandins mik.

17 Yabai whas will wilyan 'is tauyan,
laisein, framuh Gujja

uflvunnaij) bi ]>o
siyai, jjau 'iku fram mis silbin rodya.

18 Saei fram sis silbin rodei}?, hauhij^a
'i}> saei sokei|) hauhijja jns
seina sokei)? ;
sandyandins sik, sah sunyeins 'ist, yah
'inwindi]>a 'in 'imma nist.

19 Niu Moses gaf izwis wito|>, yah ni
ainshun "izwara tauyij) ])ata wito]j 1 Wha
niik sokeij) usqiman ?

20 Andliof so managei, yah qe|)un,
Unhuljjon habais ; whas j^uk sokci|> us-
qiman ?

21 Andhof Icsus, yah qaj? dn iin, Ain
waurstw gatawida, yah allai sildaleikoi]^

22 Dn])|)e Moses atgaf izwis biniait
ni J)atci fram Mose siyai, ak us attam ;
yah 'in sabbato bimaitij^ mannan.

23 Yabai bimait nimi}) manna in sab-
bato, ei ni gatairaidau witoj) ))ata Mo-
sezis, 'i|> mis liatizoj), nnte alhma mannan
liailana gatawida in sabbato?

he cac to dam freols-daege,
openhce, ac dygollice.

naes na

1

Da ludeas hine sohton on dam
freols-da?ge, and cwsedon, Hwar is he ]
12 And mycel gehlyd w?es on daere
Snme cwaedon. He
menigeo be him.
ys g5d ; odre cwsedon, Nese, ac he
bcswic]? dis folc

13 Deah hwredere ne spree nan man

openlice be him, for d^era ludea ege.^

14 Da hit wses mid-da3g dres freols-
da^ges, da code se Hselend into dam
tenqjle, and hvrde.

15 And da ludeas wundredon, and
eweedon, Humeta can des stafas, donne
he ne leornode?

16 Se Hselend him andswarode, and
cwoe]?, Min hir njs na min, ac daes de
me sende.

17 Gyf hwa wyle his willan don, he
gccnae\v|) be dfere lare, hwaeder heo si
of Gode, hwjsder de ic be me sylfum
speoe.

18 Se de be him sylfum spryc)), see})
his agen wuldor ; se de see}) da?s wuldor
de hyne sende, se is
sojjfivst, and nis
nan unrihtwisnys on him.

19 Hii ne scalde Moyscs cow se, and
Hwi sece

eower nan ne healt da se ]
ge me to ofsleanne ?

20 Da andswarode seo menigeo, and
cwa"]), Dcofol de stica]) on ; hwa sec])
de to ofsleanne ]

21 Da andswarode se Htvlond, and
cwn?}) to him, An weorc ic woihte, and
ealle ge Avundriajj.

22 Fordy Moyses eow seaUle ymb-
na^s na fordi de heo of
snydenysse ;
ISIoyse sy, ac of fjederon ; and on reste-
diegc ge ymb-snydaj) mann.

23

.... daet ^foyses
se ne sy toworpcn, and ge belga}) wid
me, fordam de ic gehaelde anne man on
rcstc-djvge 1

24 Ni stoyaij> bi siunai, ak ]>o garaihton

24 Ne deme ge be ansyne, ac demnj)

staua stoyaij).
25 Qc|)nnuli

lairu-
saulwmcite, Niu sa ist, Jiammci sokyand
usqiman ?

)\an sumai )>ize

rihtne doni.

25 Sumc cwsedon da de wjcron of
Hierusalem, Hu nis dis, se de hi sccaj)
to ofsleanne 1

9

1

1

VII. 11-25.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

483

vp, thanne and he sti3ede vp at the
feeste day, not opynli, but as in pryuei.
n Therfore the Jewis sou3ten him in
the feeste day, and seiden, Wher is he 1
12 And moche grucching was of him
in the cumpany of peple.
Forsothe
summe seiden, For he is good ; forsoth
othere seiden, Nay, but he disceyueth
the cumpanyes ;

13 Netheles no man spak opynly of

vppe, then went he also vppe vnto the
feast, nott openly, butt as it were prevely.
Then sought hym the lewes at the

1

feast, and sayde, Where is he 1

12 And moche murmurynge was there
of hym amonge the people. Some sayde.
He is goode ; wother sayde, Naye, but
he deceaveth the people ;

13 No man spake openly of hym, for

Lim, for the drede of Jewis.

feare of the lewes.

14 Forsothe now the feeste day med-
linge,"*" Jhesu wente vp in to the temple,
and tau^te.

15 And the Jewis wondriden, seyinge,
Hou kan this ma)i lettris, sithen he hath
not lernyd 1

16 Jhesu answeride to hem, and seide,
My doctrine is not myn, but his that
sente me.

17 If ony man schal wilne to do his
wille, he schal knowe of the techinge,
wher it be of God, wher I speke of
my silf.

18 He that spekith of himself, sekith
his owne glorie ; forsoth he that sekith
the glorie of him that sente him, this
is sothfast, and vnri3tfulnesse is not in
him.

1

Wher Moyses 3af not to 30U a lawe,
and no man of 30U doth the lawe 1 What
seken ^e to sle me 1

20 The cumpany answeride, and seide.
Thou hast a deuyl ; who sekith for to
sle thee ?

2

Jhesu answeride, and seide to hem,
work, and alle ^e wondren.

I haue don

22 Therfore Moyses 3af to 50U circum-
cisioun ; not for it is of Moyses, but of
fadris ; and in the saboth 3e circum-
sididen a man.

23 If a man takith circumcisioun in
the saboth, that the lawe of Moyses be
not brokun, hau 3e indigiiaoioun^ to me,
for I made al the man hool in the sa-
bot?

24 Nyle 3e deme vp the face, but demc

a ri3tful dom.

25 Th(;rfore summo of Jcnisalcm seiden,
Wlier this is not, whom the Jewis seken
to sloe ]

14 In the myddes of the feast, Jesus
went vppe into the temple, and taught.

15 And the lewes marveylled, saiynge,
Howe knoweth he the scriptures, seynge
that he never learned ?

16 Jesus answered them, and sayde,
My doctrine is nott myne, butt hys
thatt sent me.

17 Yff eny man wyll do hys will, he
shall knowe of the doctrine, whether it
be of God, or whether I spake of my

silfe.

18 He that speak eth of him silfe, seketh
his awne prayse ; butt whosoever seketh
his prayse that sent him, he ys true, and
no vnrightewesnes is in hym.

19 Did not Moses geve you a lawe,
and yet none off you kepeth the lawe 1
Why goo ye a boute to kill me 1

20 The people answered, and sayde,
Thou hast the devyll ; who goeth aboute
to kill the ?

21 Jesus answered, and sayde vnto
them, I have done won worke, and ye
all marvayle.

22 Moses therfore gave vnto you cir-
cumcision ; not because it is of Moses,
but of the fathers ; and yet ye on the
saboth daye circumcise a man.

23 Yf a man on the saboth daye re-
ceave circumcision, with out brcakynge
of the lauc off Moses, disdayne ye at
me, be cause I made a man every whit
whoale on the sa)K)th daye?

24 Judge not after the vtter aperaunce,

l)Ut iudge rightewes iudgemcnt.

25 'J'iicn Huyd sum of them of Jeru-
salem, Is nott this he, whom they went
aboute to kill ?

I

i 2

484

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

26 Yali sai ! andau^^iba rodeij), yah
'vvailit du i'mnia ni qijjaiid.
Ibai aut'.o
bi suuyai ufkunj^cduii jiai reiks, J)atei
sa ist bi sunyai Cliristus'?

27 Akei j>ana kuiiiiuin, wha})ro "ist; i|>
dI manna wait

qimij>,

Cluistus

bijje

wliajjro ist.

28 Hropida |)an, in alh laisyands lesus,
yah qijjands, Yah niik Uunnuj), yah witu)>
wha|)ro ini ; yah af mis silbin ni qam,
ak ist sunyeins saei sandida mik, ])anei
yus ni kunuu]?.

29

.... \]> ik kann ina, unte fram imma
im, yah is mik insandida.

30 Sokidcdun |)an ina gafahan, yah ni
ainshun uslagida ana ina handu, unte
nauh|ianuh ni atiddya wheila is.

31 I)) managai J>izos manageins ga-
hiubidedun imma, yah qe|)im, Ohristus
])an qimi}), ibai ei managizcins taiknins
tauyai, [laimei sa tawida 1

32 Hausidedun |)an Fareisaieis Jjo raan-
agein birodyandein bi ina l^ata ; inuh-
sandidedun andbahtans |)ai Fareisaieis,
yah |?ai auhumistans gudyans, ei ga-
faifaheina ina,
33 panuh qa|j Icsus, Nauh leitila wheihi
mi
izwis im, yah |)an gagga du })amma
sandyandin mik.

J)

34 ISokeif) mik, yah ni

bigiti}j ; yah

]>iiT(ii im ik, yus ni maguj) qiman.

26 And nu ! he spycj) openlice, and
hig ne ewecta}) nan };ing to him. Cwede
we hwsecler da ealdras ongytou, dset dis
is Crist 1

27 Ac we witon, hwanon des is ; donne
Crist cymj), donne nat nan man hwanon
he bi}).

28 Se Hselend clypode, and htrde on
dam temple, and cwie|>. Me ge cunnon,
and ge witon hwanon ic eom ; and ic
ne com fram me sylfum, ac se is s6|) de
me sende, done ge ne cunnon.

29 Ic hine can, and gif ic secge daet
ic hine ne cunne, ic beo leas, and eow
gelic ; ic hine can, and ic eom of him,
and he me sende.

30 Hig hine sohton to nimanne, and
hyra nan hys ne a3t-hran, fordam de his
tid ne com da, gyt.

31 Manega of daere menigeo gelyfdon
on hine, and cweedon, Cwede ge wyrc|>
Crist ma tucna, donne he cym)?, donne
des de]) ?

32 Da Pharisei gehyrdon da menigeo
dus nmrcniende be him ;^ da caUlras
and da Pharisei sendon hyra J)enas, da^t
hijj woldon hine gefon.

33 Da cwaej) se Haclend, Gyt ic beo
sume hwile mid eow, and ic gauge to
dam, de me sende.

34 Ge seca|) me, and ne finda}) ; and

ge ne miigou cuman, dar ic eom.

35 paruh qejmn jiai ludaieis du sis
misso, AVhadre sa skuli gaggan, j^ei weis
ni bigitaima ina ?
distahein
})iudo skuH gaggan, yah laisyan );iudos 1

uibai in

35 Dii ludcas cweedon betweonan him
sylfum, Hwyder wyle des faran, da't we
hine ne findon 1 cwyst dii wyle he faran
on J)eoda todraefednesse, and hig laTan?

36 Wha siyai j?ata waurd, Jjatci qa|),
Sokei[> mik, yah ni bigiti[)
; yah j^arei
im ik, yus ni magujj (jiman 1

36 Hwret is deos sprsec, de he spryc}>,
Ge secaj) me, and ne findal? ; and ge ne
mjigon cuman, dar ic eom 1

37 1[) in spcdistin daga |mmma mikilin
didjais, sto|) lesus, yah liropida, (lifjands,
Yabai Avliana j^aursyai, guggJU du mis,
yah driggkai.

38 Sat'i galaubci|> du mis, swaswe (|a|>
gamelcins, Awhos us wambai is rinnand
watins libandins.

39 j)atuh

bi Ahman, jninei
iskuldeduu niuian |)ai galaubyandans du

Jnin

(jajj

37 On dam seftemestan mseran freols-
djege, stod se Haelend, and clypode,
Cume to me, se de hine })yrstc, andj
drince.

38 Se de gelyfj) on me, swa da^t ge\\Tit
cwy|), Lybbendes wa?tres flod flowaj) of
his innode.
39 Da^t he cwae}) be dam Gaste, de
da sceoldon underfon de on hine gelyf-

;

VII. 26-39-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

485

26 And lo ! he spekith opynly, and
Wher the
thei seyn no thing to him.
princes knewen verili, for this is Crist ?

27 But we witen this man, of whennis
he is ; forsoth whanne Crist schal come,
no man wot of whennis he is.

28 Therfore Jhesu criede in the temple,
techinge hem, and sejdnge, And ^e witen
me, and of whennis I am j and I cam
not of my silf, but he is trewe that sente
me, whom 5e knowen not.

29 I woot him, and if I schal seie
for I woot not him, I schal be lyk to
50U, a lyere ; and I woot him, for of
him I am, and he sente me.

30 Therfore thei sou3ten for to take
him, and no man sente in to him hondis,
for his our cam not ^it.

31 Sothli many of the cumpanye bi-
leueden in to him, and seiden, Whanne
Crist schal come, wher he schal do mo
tokenes, than this doth ?

32 Pharisees herden the cumpenye of

peple grucchinge of him thes thingis
and the princes
of Pharisees senten
mynistris, that thei schulden take him.

33 Therfore Jhesu seide to hem, 5it
a litel tyme I am with 50U, and I go
to the fadir, that sente me.

34 3e schulen seke me, and 36 schulen
not fynde ; and where I am, ^e mown
not come.

35 Therfore the Jewis seiden to hem
silf, Whidur is this to goynge, for we
schulen not fynde him 1 wher he is to
goyinge in to scateringe^ ot hethene
men, and is to techinge hethene men"?

36 What is this word, which he seide,
3e schulen scke me, and 30 schulen not
fynde ; and where I am, 30 mown not
come ]

37 Forsoth in the lastc day of the
greto feeste, Jhesu stood, and criede,
Beyinge, If ony man thirstith, come he
to mc, and drynke he.

38 He that bihuoth in to me, aa the
scripture seith, Flodis of quyke watir
Bchulcn flowe of his wombc.

39 Sothli he scidc this thing of the
Hooly Ooost, whom nnii bileuyngc in

26 Beholde ! he speaketh boldly, and
they saye nothynge to him. Do not
oure ruelars knowe in dede, that this
is very Christ?

27 Butt we knowe this man, whence
he is j but when Christ commeth, no
man shall knowe whence he is.

28 Then cryed Jesus in the temple, as
he taught, sayinge. And me ye knowe,
and whence I am ye knowe ; and I am
nott come off my silfe, butt he thatt
sent me is true, whom ye knowe nott.

29

.... I knowe hym, for I am off hym,
and he hath sent me.

30 Then sought the lewes to take
hym, butt no man layde hondes on hym,
be cause his tyme was nott yett come.

31 Many off the people beleved on
hym, and sayde. When Christ commeth,
will he do moo myracles, then this man
hathe done '?

32 The Pharises herde that the people
murmured suche thynges about hym ;
and the Pharises and scribes sent minis-
ters forthe, to take hym.

33 Then sayde Jesus vnto them, Yett
am I a lytell whyle with you, and then
goo I vnto hym, that sent me.

34 Ye shall seke me, and shall nott
fynde me ; and where I am, thither can
ye nott come.

35 Then sayde the lewes bitwene them
selves. Whither will he goo, that we
shall nott fynde hym ?
will he goo
amonge the gentyls which arc scattered
all a broade, and teache the gentyls 1

36 What maner off sayinge ys thys,
that he sayde, Yc shall scke mc, and
shall nott fynde me ; and where I am,
thither can ye nott comel

37 In the last daye, that grctt daye off
the fcastc, Jesus stode, and cryed, say-
inge, Yf cny man thyrst, Ictt hym come
vnto mo, and drynke.

38 Whosoever beleveth on mc, as sayeth
the scripture, Out off his belly shall
flowe ryvers off water off lyfe.

39 This spake he off tiic Sprcto, which
they that bclcvcd on hym shuldc re-

1

480

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXOX, 995.

[St. John

irnma ; uiite ni nauh|'anuh was Alima
sa Weiha ana im, uiitc lesus nauhj'anuh
ni hauhi})S was.

40 Managai }\an jnzos manageins, liaus-
yandans jjize waurdc, qe|>un, Sa "ist bi
sunyai sa praufctes.

4

Sumaili qc|)un, Sa i'st Christus. Sum-
aili qe)>uii, Ibai |>au^ us Galeilaia Christus
qimij) 1

42 Niu gameleins qa]?, ])atei us fraiwa
Daweidis, yah us lje{)hiihaim weihsa,
jjarei was Daweid, Christus qimij) 1

don ; d;1 gyt na?s se Gast gcseald, fordam
de se Hcjclend naes da gyt gewuldrod.^

40 Of cl?ere tide seo menigeo cwfrj), da
lieo gehyrde das his spraece, Des is s6\>
witega.

41 Sume cwsedon, He is Crist.

Sume
cwa'don, Cwcde ge, cymj) Crist fram
Galilea 1

42 Hii ne cwy|) dait gewrit, da^t Crist
cym}) of Dauides cynne, and of Bethleem
ceastre, dar dar Dauid waes ]

43 panuh missaqiss "in ]?izai managein
warj) bi ina.

44 Sumaih })an ize wildedun fahan ina,
akei ni ainshun uslagida ana "ina hand-
uns.

45 Galijjun |7an ])ai andbahtos du )>aini
auhumistam gu lyam yah Fareisaium,
jiaruh qejjun du im yainai, Duwhe ni
attauhuj? ina 1

46 Andhofun |)ai andbahtos, Niwhanhun

aiw rodida manna, swaswc sa manna.

47 Andhofun )>an im |)ai Fareisaieis,

Ibai yali yus afairzidai siyu|> 1

48 Sai yau ainshun })ize reike galaub-

43 Witodlice ungejjwsernes wjes ge-

worden on diere menigeo for him.

44 Sume liig woldon hine niman, ac

hyra nan his ne aet-hran.

45 Da ]>enas comon to dam bisceopum
and to dam Phariseum, and hig ewsedon
to him. For hwi ne brohton ge hine
hider 1
46 Da andwyrdon da jjenas and cwaedon,
Ne spra3C nsefre nan man, swa des man
sprycf>.
47 Da cwsedon da Pharisei to him,
Synd ge beswicene ?

^

48 Cwede ge gelyfde senig dsera ealdra,

idedi imma, ai))]?au Fareisaie "i

odde df^ra Pharisea on hyne ?

49 Alya so managei, Jjaiei ni kunnun

49 Ac dcos menigeo, de ne ciide da ze,

witojj, fraqi)>anai sind.

50 Qajj Nikaudenms du 'im, saei afid-
dya du imma in naht, sums wisands "izci,

51 Ibai ^vito}) unsar stoyi)> mannan,
nil)ai faurj)is hausei]> ft-am imma, yah
ufkuniiai)) wlia tauyai 1

52 Aiulliofiin, yah qcjmn du imma,
Ibai yah j>u us Galcihiia is ]
Ussokei,
yah saiwli, j^atei praufctus us Galeilaia
ni urreisij).

53

hig synd awp-gede.

50 Da c\vi\i\) Nichodemus to him, se
de cona to him on nyht, se wa^s hyra
an,

51 Cwyst du demj) ure se aenigne man,
biiton hyne man ser gehyre, and wite
hwa^t he do 1

52 Hig andswaredon, and cwaedon to
him, Cwyst dii d.Tt dii
Galilcisc ?
Smea, and gcseoh, dset nan witega ne
cymj) fram Galilea.
53 And hig cyrdon ealle ham.

si

Chap. VHI.
Oliuetes diine.

^i Sc Haclcnd fc'r on

2 And com eft on dreg-red to dam
temple ; and call dci?t folc com to him ;
and he soet and laerde hinr.

1

1

VII. 40-yiIL 2.] \yYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

487

to him weren to takinge ; forsotli the
Spirit was not 5it 5ouun, for Jhesus was
not 3it glorified.

40 Therfore of that cumpanj^e, whanne
thei hadden herde thes wordis of him,
thei seiden, This is verili a prophete.

41 Othere seiden, This is Crist.

For-
soth summe seiden, Wher Crist cometh
fro Galilee ?

42 Wher the scripture seitli not, that
of the seed of Dauith, and of the castel
of Bethleem, where Dauith was, Crist
Cometh 'I
43 And so dissencioun is maad in the

cumpany for him,
44 Forsothe summe of hem wolden
take him, but no man sente hondis on
him.

45 Therfore the mynistris camen to
the bischopis and Pharisees, and thei
seiden to hem, Whi brou^te ^e not him 1

46 The mynistris answeriden, Neuere

man spak so, as this spekith.

47 Therfore the Farisees answeriden

to hem, Wher and ^e be disceyued 1

48 Wher ony of the princes bileueden

in to him, or of the Pharisees ?

49 But this cumpany of peple, that

knew not the lawe, ben cursid.

50 Nycodeme seith to hem, he that
cam to him in ny3te, that was oon of
hem,

5

A^Tier oure lawe demeth a man, no
but first it haue herd of him, and knowe
what he doth 1

52 Thei answeriden, and seiden to him,
Wher and thou ert a man of Galilee'?
Soke thou scripturis, and se thou, for a
prophete rysitli not of Galilee.
53 And thei turncdyn a3en, ech in to
bis hows.

ceave ; for the Holy Gost was not yet
there, because that Jesus was nott yett
glorified.

40 Many off the people, when they
herde this sayinge, sayd, This is no
doute a prophet.

4 r Wother sayde, This is Christ. Some
sayde, Shall Christ come out off Galile 1

42 Sayetb nott the scripture,

that
Christ shall come off the seed off David,
and out of the toune off Bethleem, where
David was 1

43 So was there dissencion amonge

the people for hys sake.
44 And some off them wolde have
taken hym, butt noo man layed hondes
on hym.

45 Then cam the ministers to the hye
prestes and Pharises, and they sayde
vnto them, Why have ye not brought
hym?

46 The servauntes answered, Never

man spake, as thys man speaketh.

47 Then answered them the Pharises,

Are ye alsoo disceaved ?

48 Doth eny of the ruelers, or off the

Pharises beleve on hym 1

49 Butt the commen people, whyche

knowe nott the lawe, are a cursed.

50 Nicodemus sayde vnto them, he
that cam to Jesus by nyght, whych was
one off them,

51 Doth oure lawe iudge cny man,
before it be herde, and knowen what
he hath done ^

52 They answered, and sayde vnto
hym, Arte thou alsoo off Galile 1 Searche,
and loke, for out of Galile aryseth noo
prophet.
53 And every man went vnto his awnc
housse.

Chap. VIII.

i For>ot]ic Jhesu wcntc

in to the mount of Olyuctc.

2 And erly eft ho cam in to the temple;
and al tlio peple cam to him j and he
Bittingc tau3tc hem.

Chap. VIII.

i Jesus went vnto the

Mountc Olivctc.

2 And erly in the mornyngc cnm
agaync into the temi)le ; and all the
])eoplc cam vnto hym ; and he sate
dounc and taught them.

488

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Joun

;

3 Da Iseddon da Pharisei and da boc-
eras to him an wif seo waes aparod on
unriht-hsemede, and setton hig to-middes
hyra,

4 And cwsedon to him, Lfireow, dis
wif waes afiinden on unrihton hsemede, .

5 lytoyses us bebead on doere se doet
we sceoldon dus gerade mid stanum
oftorfian ; hwret cwyst dii 1

C Dis hig cwsedon his fandiende, daet
Se H?elcnd abcah
I nyder, and wrat mid his fingre on dare

hig hine wreliton.

eorj^an.

7 Da hig |)urh-wunedon liine acsiende,
da aras he upp, and cwa'J) to him, Loca,
hwylc eower si synleas, weorpe serest
stan on hi.

8 And he abeah eft, and wrat on dsere

eorjjan.

9 Da hig dis gehyrdon, da eodon hig

ut an ajfter anum,

.

.

.

.

; and he gebad dar sylf, and daet

ynf st5d dier on middan.

10 Se Haelend aras up,

and
cw9e|> to hyre, Wif, hwar synd da de
de wregdon 1 ne fordemde de nan man.

11 And heo cwae}>, Na, Drihten. And

se Haelend cwae}>, Ne ic de ne fordcme
do ga, and ne synga dii naefire ma.

12 Aftra (111 im lesiis rodidn, qajuli,
Ik im liuluij) manasethiis ; saei laisteij?
niik, ni gaggi|> in riqiza, ak habai|j liuliaj>
libainais.

12 ^Eft se Haelend spraec das Jung to
him, and cw^el^, Ic eom middan-eardes
leoht ; se de me fylig]', ne gaej) lie na
on I'ystro, ac he ha^fj) lifes leoht.

13 panuh qo)iim du imma }>ai Farei-
saieis, pu bi [>uk silban wcitwodeis ; so
weitwodi|>a }icina iiist siinyeina.

14 Andliof Icsus, yah qa|i du im, Yah
yabai ik wcitwodya bi mik silban, sunya
ist so woitwodi|)a mcina ;
unto Avait
wliajjro qam, yah wha|) galei|)a.
Ij) yus
ni wituj) wliaj^ro qima, ai|)|)au wha|> ga-

lei|)a.

13 Da Pharisei cwjrdon to him, Du
cydst gewitnesse be de sylfum ; nis din
gewitnes s6\>.

14 Se Haelend andswarodc, and cwa?J>
to him, Gif ic cyde gewitnesse be me
sylfum, min gewitnes is so
; fordam de
ic Wat hwanon ic com, and hwyder ic
gfi. Ge nyton hwanon ic com, ne hwyder
icga.

J)

^

15 Yus bi Icika stoyiji, V)' ik ni stoya

15 Ge demaj) softer flaesce, ic ne deme

ainnohun ;

16 Aj>[)an yabai stoya ik, staua mcina

nanum men ;

16 And gyf ic deme, min dom is s6}i,

1

2

;
;

VIIL 3-i6.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

489

3 Sotlili scribis and Pharisees bryngen a
womman takun in auowtrie, and settiden
hir in the middil,

3 The scribes and Pharises brought
vnto hym a woman taken in advoutry,
and sett her in the middes,

4 And seiden to him, Maistir, this
womman is now takun in auoutrie, .

.

.

5 Forsoth in the lawe Moyses com-
aundide vs for to stoone siche ; therfore
what seist thou ]

6 Sothli thei seiden this thing tempt-
inge him, that thei my3ten accuse him.
Forsoth e Jhesu bowinge him silf doun,
wrot with the fyngir in the erthe.

7 Sothly whanne thei lastiden"*" axinge
him, he reiside him silf, and seide to
hem, Which of 30U that is with oute
synue, first sende a stoon in to hir.

4 And sayde vnto hym, Master, thys
woman was taken in advoutry, even as
the dede was a doyng.

5 Moses in the lawe commaunded vs
that suche shulde be stoned ; what sayst
thou therfore 1

6 And thys they sayde to tempt hym,
that they myght have wher off to accuse
hym.
Jesus stouped doune, and wyth
hys fynger wrote on the grounde.

7 And whill they continued axynge
hym, he lifte hym sylfe vppe, and sayde
vnto them, Lett hym thatt ys a monge
you wyth out synne, cast the fyrst stone
at her.

8 And eft lie bowinge doun him silf,

8 And agayne he stouped doune, and

wroot in the erthe.

9 Sothli thei heeringe thes thingis,
wenten awey oon aftir an other, thei
bigynnynge at the eldere men ; and
Jhesu dwelte aloone, and the womman
Btondinge in the myddel.

10 Sothli Jhesu reisynge him silf,

.

.

.

seide to hir, Womman, wher
ben thei that accusiden thee? no man
dampnede thee.

1

The which seyde, No man, Lord.
Jhesu seith
schal
dampne thee ; go thou, and now aftir-
ward nyle thou do synne.

Nether I

hir.

to

wrote on the grounde.

9 As sone as they herde that, they

went out won by won, the eldest fyrst
and Jesus was lefte a lone, and the
woman stondynge in the myddes.

10 When Jesus had lifte vppe hym
sylfe agayne, and savve noo man butt
the woman, he sayde vnto her, Woman,
wliere are those thyne accusars 1 hath
no man condempned the 1

11 She sayde, Syr, no man.

Jesus

sayde. Nether do I condempne the
goo hence, and synne no moare.

12 Therfore eft Jhesu spak to hem,
seyinge, I am the li3t of the world ; he
that sueth me, walkith not in derk-
Dessis, but schal haue the li3t of lyf.

13 Therfore the Pharisees seiden, Thou
berist witnessing of thi silf ; thi witness-
ing is not trcwc.

14 Jhesu answeridc, and seide to hem,
And if I here witnessing of my silf, my
I woot fro
witnessing is trcwc ;
whennis I cam, and whidur 1 go.
For-
Bothc ^c witen not fro whcnnus I come,
or whidur [ go.

for

1

Then spake Jesus agayne vnto them,
sayinge, I am the light off the world e ;
he that foloweth me, shall nott walkc
in darcknes, butt shall have the light
of lyfe.

13 The Pharises sayde vnto hym, Thou
bearest reccordc of thy sylfe ; thy rc-
corde ys not true.

14 Jesus answered, and sayde vnto
them. And yf I beare rccorde off* my
sylfe, my rccorde is true ; for I knowc
whence I cam, and whither I goo. Yo
cannot tell whence I come, and whither
I goo.

15 Forsoth 30 dcmcn vp the flcisch, I

15 Ye iudgc after the flcsshc, I iudgc

16 And if 1 dcmc, my dom is trcwc,

i 6 And yff" I iudgc, then ys my iudg-

dcmc not ony man ;

no man ;

8
7

490

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Joiix

sunyeina 1st, unte ains iii im, ak ik yah
saci sandida niik atta.

1

Yah ])an 111 witoda izwaramma ga-
|)atei twaddyc manne weit-

n\e\\\> ist,
wodi|'a sunya ist.

1

ik im, saei weitwodya bi mik sil-
ban, yah wcitwodeij? bi mik, saei sandida
mik, atta.

19 Qe})un ])an du 'imma, Whar 'ist sa
atta JK'iiis 1 Andhof lesus, Ni mik kun-
i}> mik kiin})-
nu}), nih attan meiuana ;
cdeij', yah |)au attan meiuana kunj^edei]?.

20 po waurda rodida 'in gazaufwhikio,
laisyands in alh ; yah ainshun ni faifah
ina, unte nauh|>anuh ni qam wheila is.

21 panuh qa|> aftra du im lesus, Ik
galeij)a,yah sokei|> mik, yah "in frawaurlit-
];adei ik gagga,
ai izwarai gadau]>nij) 3
yus ni magu}) qiman.

22 Qejjun ^an ludaieis, Nibai usqimai
sis silbin, ei qij'ij), padei ik gagga, yus
ni magu|> qiman 1

23 Yah qa|> du im lesns, Yus us |iaim
dala]>ro siyuj), i}> ik us j>aim iupa}n'o im ;
yus us l^amma fairwliau siyu]?, i|> ik ni
im us jjamma fairwhau.

24 Qa]> nu izwis,

patei gadauj^nij)
in frawaurhtim izwaraim ; yabai auk
ni galaubei]> jjatei ik im^ gadau|>nij) in
frawaurhtim izwaraim.

25 paruh qe))un du imma, pu whas is 1
Yah qaj) du im lesus, Anastodeins, jiatei
yah rodya du izwis.

fordam de ic ne eom ana, ac ic aud se
fieder de me sende.

17 And on eowre se

is awriten, dset

twegra manna gewitnes is s6]\

18 Ic eom, de cyde gewitnesse be me
sylfum, and se feeder de me sende, cy|)
gewitnesse be me.

19 Witodhee hig cwacdon to him, Hwar
Se Ilselend liim and-
is din fabler ^
swarode and cwa»J>, Ne cunne ge me, ne
minne fteder ; gyf ge me cudon, wen is
diet ge cudon minne faeder.

20 Das word he spjec -xt ceap-sccanicle,
; and nan man liyne ne nam,

fordam de hys tid ne com da gyt.

21 Witodlice eft se Haelend cwa?)) to
him,"*^ Ic fare, and ge me seca}^, and ge
swelta]) on eowre synne ; ne mage ge
cuman, dyder ic fare.

22 Da cwsedon da ludeas, Cwede ge
ofslyli)) he hine sylfne, fordam he seg|>,
Ge ne milgon cuman, dyder ic fare ]

23 Dii cw£e}j he to him, Ge synd nyd-
ane, and ic eom ufane ; ge synd of
disum middan-earde, ic ne eom of disum
middan-earde.

24 Ic eow sacde, Diet ge swcUaj> on
eowrum synnum ; gif ge ne gclyfaj) da^t
ic hit sy, ge swelta}) on eowre synne.

25 Da cwsedon hi to liim, Ilwnct eart
Se Hselend cwiej) to him, Ic eom

dii ]
fruma, de to eow sprece.

26 INIanag skal bi izwis rodyan, yah
stoyan, akei saei sandida mik sunycins
ist ; yah ik, Jjatei hausida at imma, })ata
rodya in |)amma fairwhau.

27 Ni frojjun, jjatei attan im qaJ).

28 Qajmh j^an du i'm lesus, pan usluiuh-
ci|) ))ana sunn mans, ))anuh ufkumiai)>,
))atci ik im, yah af mis silbin tauya ni
waiht ; ak swaswe laisida mik atta
meins, )>ata rodya.

26 Ic haebbe fela be eow to sprecamie,
and to dcmanne, ac se de me sende is
s6)5fa?st ; and ic sprece on middan-earde
da I'ing, de ic a^t liim geliyrde.

27 And hig ne undergeton, da3t he

tealde him God to fieder.

28 Se Iliclend cwa?!^ to him, Donne
ge maunes sunu up-alicbbaji, doniie ge-
cnawe ge, da^t ic hit eom, and ic ne do
nan jjing of me sylfum ; ac ic sprece
das j'iiig, swa faeder me lacrde.

29 Yah saei sandida mik mi|> mis ist,
ni bilai}) mis ainanuna atta ; unte ik,
]?atei leikaij) imma, tauya sinteino.

29 And se de me sende is mid me, and
he ne forlsct me anne ; fordam dc ic wyrce
symle da }>iug, de him synd gecwcme.

;

1

;
;

VIII. 17-29] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, J526.

491

for I am not alooue^ but I and tlie faclir
that sente me.

17 And in 50ure lawe it is writun, for

the witnessing of twei men is trewe.

ment true, for I am not a lone, butt I
and my father that sent me.

17 Itt ys also written in youre lawe,

that the testimony of two men ys true.

18 I am, that here witnessing of my
silf, and the fadir that sente me, berith
witnessinof of me.

19 Therfore thei seiden to him, Wher
is thi fadir? Jhesu answeride, Nether
5e witen^ me, nether ^e witen my fadir
if 56 wisten me, perauenture and 30
schulden wite my fader.

20 Jhesu spak thes wordis in the tre-
serie, techinge in the temple ; and no
man took him, for his our cam not ^it.

21 Therfore eft Jhesu seide to hem,
Lo ! I go, and ^e schulen seche me, and
5e schulen deye in 30ure synne ; whidur
I go, 56 mown not come.

22 Therfore the Jewis seiden, Wher he
schal sle him silf, for he seith, Whidur I
go, 3e mown not come 1

23 And he seide to hem, ^e ben of
bynethe, I am of aboue ; ^e ben of this
w^orld, I am not of this world.

24 Therfore I seide to . 50U, For ^e
schulen dye in ^oure synnes ; forsothe
if 3e schulen not bileue for I am, 3e
schulen deye in ^oure synne.

25 Therfore thei seiden to him. Who
art thou ? Jhesu seide to hem, The bi-
gynnyng,^ which and speke to 30U.

26 I haue many thingis for to speke,
and deme of 30U, but lie that sente me
is sotlifast ; and I speke in the world
thes thingis, that I lierde of him.

27 And thei kncwen not, for he seide

his fadir God.

28 Tlicrforc Jhesu seith to hem, Wlianne
3c lian rcysid mannis sone, thanne 30
schulen knowc, for I am, and of my silf
I do no tiling ; but as my fadir tau3te
me, I speke thes thingis.

29 And lie that sontc me is with mc,
and Icftc not me aloone ; for 1 do cuerc
tho thingis, that ben plesaunt to him.

18 I am won, that beare witnes off my
sylfe, and my father that sent me, beareth
witnes off me.

19 Then sayde they vnto hym, Where
answered. Ye
is thy father ?
nether knowe me, nor yet my father
yff ye had knowen me, ye shulde have
knowen my father alsoo.

Jesus

20 These wordes spake Jesus in the

tresury, as he taught in the temple
and no man layde hondes on hym, for
hys tyme was nott yett come.

2

Then sayde Jesus agayne vnto them,
I goo my waye, and ye shall seke me,
and shall deye in youre synnes ; whither
I goo, thither can ye not come.

22 Then spake the lewes, Wyll he kyll
him sylfe, be cause he sayth, Whither I
goo, thither can ye not come 1

23 And he sayde vnto them. Ye are
from beneth, I am from above ; ye are
of this worlde, I am nott
off thys
worlde.

24 I sayde therfore vnto you. That ye
shall deye in youre synnes ; for except
ye beleve that I am he, ye shall deye in
youre synnes.

25 Then sayde they vnto hym, Who
arte thou 1 And Jesus sayde vnto them,
Even the very same thynge, that I saye
vnto you.

26 I have many thyngcs to saye, and
to iudge of you, but he that sent me is
true ; and I speake in the worlde those
thyngcs, whych I have herde of hym.

27 They vnderstode not, that he spake

of his father.

28 Then sayde Jesus vnto them. When
ye have lift vppe an liye the sonne off
man, then shall ye knowe, that I am ho,
and thatt I do nothyngc off my silfe ;
butt as my father hath taught mc, even
800 I speake.

29 And he tliat sent mc ys with mo,
my father hath nott lefte me alone ; for
I do alwaycs those thyngcs, tliat please
him.

;

;

492

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

30 pata imma rodyandin, managai ga-

30 Da he das jjing sprsec, manega ge-

laubidcdun imina,

31 panuli qaj) Jtesus du ))aim galaub-
yandam sis ludaium, Yaljai yus gastaiidi|>
in waurda meinamma, bi suiiyai siponyos
meinai siyuj^

32 Yah ufkunnai}) sunya, yah so sunya

friyans izwis briggijj.

33 Aiidhofuii imma, Fraiw Abrahamis
siyum, yah ni mannhun skalkinodediim
aiw whanhun ; whaiwa |)U
qij^is, patei
friyai wair|)ij) 1

34 Andhof im Jtesus, Amen, amen,
qipa izwis, |)atei whazuh saei tauyij) fra-
waurht, skalks ist frawaurhtai.

35 Sah ])an skalks ni wisip in garda,

du aiwa, sunus wisijj du aiwa.

lyfdon on liine.'''

31 Witodlice se Haelend cwsej) to dam
ludcum, de him gelyfdon, Gif ge wuniap
on minre spaece, sojjlice ge beo}j mine
leorning-cnihtas

32 And ge oncnawa}) s6}>fa?stnysse, and

s5j?f8estnes eow alyst.
33 Da andswarodon hi him and cwccd-
on, We synd Abrahames cynnes, and ne
})eowedon we nnnum men naefre ; hiimeta
cwyst du, Ge bco]^ frige ?

34 Se Hselend him andswarode and
S6|j, ic eow seege, dajt selc de

cwaej),
synne wyrc}?, is dxre synne )?eow.

35 Witodlice se })eow ne wuna|> on
huse, on ecnesse, se sunu wuna]> on
ecnesse.

36 Yabai nu sunus izwis friyans briggi|>,

36 Gif se sunu eow alyst, ge beoj) s5|j-

bi sunyai friyai siyu}?.

lice frige.

37 Wait ))atei fraiw Abrahamis siyu)),
akei sokei}) mis usqiman, unte waurd
mein ni gamot in izwis.

38 Ik })atei gasawh at attin meinamma
rodya ; yah yus, [latei hausidedu]) fram
attin izwaramma, tauyi}>.

39 Andhofun, yah qe|)un du imma,
Atta unsar Abraham ist.
Qa|) im lesus,
I]? barna Abraliamis wesei]?, waurstwa
Abrahamis tawidedeij).

37 Ic wat daet ge synd Abrahames
beam, ac ge secaj? me to ofsleanne, for-
dam min spaec ne wuna}) on eow.

38 Ic sprece diet, de ic mid fa?der ge-
seah ; and ge do}? da ping, de ge mid
eowrum feeder gesawon.
39 Da andswarodon hig, and cwaedon
to him, Abraham is ure fiodcr. Da cwiv\>
se Hselend to him, Gif ge Abrahames
beam synd, wyrca]) Abrahames weorc.

40 1]) nu sokeij) mik usqiman, mannan
izei sunya izwis rodida, j'oei hausida
fram Gujja ; j)atuh Abraham ni tawida.

41 Yus tauyi|) toya attins izwaris.
panuli qc[)un imma, Weis us horinassau
ni siyum gabauranai ; ainana attan aig-
um, Gu}>.

42 Qaj) du Vm Icsus, Yabai GuJ) atta
izwar wesi, fri()dcdci[> jvui mik ; unte ik
fram Gu})a urrann, yah qam ; nih jnin
auk fram mis silbin ni qam, ak is mik
insandida.

43 Duwlie majjlein meina ni kunnu[' ?

unto ni magu|> hausyan waurd mein.

40 Nu ge secaj) me to ofsleanne, done
man de eow saede s6}>fa?stnesse, da de ic
gehyrde of Gode ; ne dyde Abraham
swa.

41 Ge ^vyTca|J eowres fneder weorc.
Hig cwsedon witodlice to him, Ne synd
we of forligere acenuede ; we habbaj>
anne, God, to fneder.

42 Witodlice se Haelend cw.TJ) to liim
Gif God waere eower fieder, witodlice ge
lufcdon me ; ic com of Gode ; ne com
ic na fram me sylfum, ac he me sende.

43 Hwi ne gecnawe ge mine spraece 1
[fordam de ge ne miigon gehyran mine

si)tece.]^

44 Yus us attin, diabaulau, siyu|>, yah
histuns |)is attins izwaris wilei|> tauyan.
Yains manamaui-}>rya was fram frum-
istya, yah in sunyai ni gast()|> ; unte
pan rodei]) liugn,
nist sunya in inmia.

44 Ge synd deofles beam, and ge willa|)
wyrcan eowres faeder willan. He waes
fram frym|)C man-slaga, and he ne wun-
odc on s6[)fa3stncsse ; fordam dc soj^fa^st-
Donne he sj^ryc]? leas-
ncs nis on him.

;

;

;

VIII. 30-44-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
^o Him spekinge thes tliingis, many
men bileueden in to him.

31 Therfore Jhesu seide to the Jewis,
that bileueden in to him, If 36 schulen
dwell e in my word, verili 56 schulen be
my disciplis

32 And 5e schulen knowe the treuthe,

and the treuthe schal delyuere 50U.

33 Therfore the Jewis answeriden to
him, We ben the seed of Abraham, and
to no man we seruyden euere ; hou seist
thou, 3e schulen be free 1

34 Jhesu answeride to hem, Treuli,
treuli, I seie to 50U, for ech man that
doth synne, is the seruaunt of synne.

35 Sothli the seruaunt dwellith not in
the hous, into withouten ende, the sone
dwellith into withouten ende.

36 Therfor if the sone schal delyuere

50U, verili ^e schulen be free.

37 I woot for 5e ben Abrahams sones,
but 36 seken for to sle me, for my word
takith not in 30U.

38 And I speke tho thingis, that I sy3
at ray fadir ; and 36 don tho thingis,
that 3e sy3en at 3oure fadir.

39 Thei answeriden, and seiden to him,
Abraham is oure fadir.
Jhesu seith to
liem. If 3e ben the sones of Abraham,
do 3e the werkis ot Abraham.

40 Sothli now 36 seken to sle me, a
man that haue spoken to 30U treuthe,
that I herde of God ; Abraham dide not
this thing.

41 3<^ don the workis of 30ure fadir.
And so thei seiden to him. We ben not
bom of fornycacioun ; we han o fadir,
God.

42 Therfore Jliesu seide to hem. If
God were 30ure fadir, sothli 30 schulden
loue me; forsothc I proccdide^ of God,
and cam ; nether sothli I cam of my
8ilf, but he sente me.
43 Wlii knowen 3c not my speche? for
3c mown not hccre my word.

44 3e ^>en of the fudir, the deuel, and
3c wolcn do the desyris of 3ourc fadir.
lie was a mansleere fro tlio bigynnyng,
and in treuthe he stood not ; for treuthe
Wliannc he spekith a
is not in him.

TYNDALE, 1526.

493

30 As he spake these wordes, many

beleved on hym.

31 Then sayde Jesus to those lewes,
which beleved on hym, Yf ye continue
in my sayinge, then are ye my very
disciples

32 And ye shall knowe the trueth,

and the trueth shall make you free.
33 They answered hym, We are Abra-
hams seede, and were never bonde to
eny man ; why sayest thou then. Ye
shalbe made fre 1

34 Jesus answered them, Verely, verely,
I saye vnto you, that whosoever com-
mitteth synne, is the servaunt of synne.
35 And the servaunt abydeth nott in
the housse, for ever, butt the sonne
abydeth ever.

36 Yf the Sonne therfore shall make

you fre, then are ye fre in dede.

37 I knowe that ye are Abrahams seed,
butt ye seke meanes to kyll me, be cause
my sayinges have noo place in you.
38 I speake, that I have sene wyth my
father ; and ye do that, whych ye have
sene wyth youre father.

39 They answered, and sayde vnto
hym, Abraham is oure father.
Jesus
sayde vnto them, Yf ye were Abrahams
children, ye wolde do the dedes of Abra-
ham.

40 But nowe ye goo about to kill me,
a man that have tolde you the truthe,
which I have herde off my father ; this
did not Abraham.

41 Ye do the dedes of youre father.
Then sayde they vnto hym, We were
nott borne of fornicacion ; we have won
father, that is God.

42 Jesus sayde vnto them, Yf God
were youre father, then wolde ye have
loved me ;
for I procede forthc, and
come from God ; nether cam I of my
sylfe, butt he sent me.
43 Why do ye nott knowe my spcachc 1
be cause ye cannot abyde the hearyngc
off my wordes.

44 Ye arc of youre father, the devyll,
aTi(i the lustcs off yoiirc father ye will
foloNVC. He was a inurtherer from tlie be-
gynnynge, and aboode nott in the truetli
be cause there ys noo trueth in hym.

494

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

us scinaim roJei|) ;
yah atta is.

untc liugnya ist,

unga, he sprycj) of him sylfum ; fordam
de he is leas, and hi.^ feeder eac.

45 I|) ik )jatei sunya rodida, ni ga-

45 Witodlice ge ne gelyfaj> me, fordam

;

laubei}) mis.

46 Whas izwara gasakij) mik bi fra-
|)aiule sunya qij'a, duwhe ni

waurlit 1
galaubeij? mis ?

47 Sa wi sands us Gu|'a, waurda Gu})S
du[)e yus ni hausci)), unte us

hauscijj ;
Guj^a ni siyuj).

48 Andhofun |)an

ludaieis, yah
qe))un du imma, Niu waila qi) am weis,
]>u, yah unhuljon
]jatei Samareites is
habais 1

|)ai

49 Andhof lesus, Ik unhuljjon ni haba,
ak swera at tan meiuana, yah yus un-
sweraij) mik.

de ic secge eow sojjfa.'stnesse.'''

46 Hwylc eower ascuna)) me for synne 1

gif ic so}) secge, Invi ne gelyfe ge me ]

47 Se de is of Gode, gehyrj? Godes
word ; fordig ge ne gehyra]?, fordam de
ge ne synd of Gode.

48 AVitodlice da ludeas andswaredon,
and cwaedon to him, Hwi ne cwede we
wel, dset du eart Samaritanisc, and eart
wod ]

49 Se Hselend andswarode, and cwa?]',
Ne com ic wod, ac ic arwur|>ige minne
fa^der, and ge unarwurjiedon me.

50 Ik ni sokya hauhein meina j

ist,

50 Witodlice ne sece ic min wuldor

saei sokeij?, yah stoyi)).

51 Amen, amen, qijja izwis, yabai whas
waurd mein fastaijj, daujju ni gasaiwhijj
aiwa dage.

52 panul) qe]'Un du imma j^ai ludaieis,
Nu ufkunjiedum, patei unlml|)on liabais.
Abraham gadauj^noda, yah praufeteis,
qij^is, Yabai whas mein waurd
yah |)U
fastai, ni kausyai dauj'au aiwa dage.

se is, de sec]), and dem|).

51 S6\>, ic secge eow, gif hwa mine
sprsece gehealt, ne gesyhj) he dea)> naelre.

52 Da cwaedon da ludeas, Nii we
witon, da3t du eart wod. Abraham wa?9
dead, and da witegan, and dii cwyst,
Gif hwa mine sprsece gehealt, ne bi}) he
najfre dead.

53 Ibai jm maiza is attin unsaramma
Abrahama, saei gadau|>noda, yah prau-
feteis gadaujjuodedun ; whana ]>uk silban
tauyis j'U 1

54 Andhof lesus, Yabai ik hauhya mik
silban, so hauhcins meina ni waihts ist ;
ist atta meins, saei hauhci|> mik, |)anei
yus qi\n\), l)atei Gu}> unsar ist.

55 Yali ni kunnu^ ina, i|) ik kann ina ;
yah yabai qe|)yau {mtei ni kunnyau ina,
siyau t,''aleiks izwis liugnya ; ak kann
ina, yah waurd is fasta.

53 Cwyst dii da3t du sy m?ei-ra donne
lire fa3der Abraham, se wies dead, and
da witegan wseron deade ; hwfet jjinc}?
de diiet du sy 1

54 Se Hselend him andswarode, Gif ic
wuldrige me sylfne, nis min wuldor
naht ; min fa?der is, de me wuldraj), be
dam ge cweda}), d{«t he sy lire God.

55 And ge ne cudon hine, ic hine cann;
and gif ic secge d»t ic hine ne cunne, ic
beo leas and eow gelic ; ac ic hyne cann,
and ic healde his sprsece.

56 Abraham, atta izwar, sifaida, ei ga-
sewhi dag meinana ; yah gasawh, yah
faginoda.

57 piuuih qe|iun |)ai ludaieis du imma,
Fimftiguns yere nauh ni habais, yah
Abraliam sawlit 1

58 Qii|) im lesus, Amen, amen, qil'a
izwis, faurj'izei Abraham waurj'i, im ik.

56 Abraham, eower fabler, goblissode,
diet he gesawe minne da>g ; and he ge-
seah, and geblissode.

57 Dii ludeas cwa:don to him, Gyt dii
ne eart fiftig wintre, and gesawe dii
Abraham 1

58 Se Hselend cwa?}' to him, Ic wa-s,

serdam de Abraham wa3S.

59 J^anuh ncmun stainans, ci waurpeina

59 Hig namon stanas, to dam dxt liig

VIII. 45-59] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
lesinge, he spckith of his owne thingis ;
for he is a lyiere, and fadir of it.

45 Sotheli for I seye treuthe, 5e bileuen

not to me.
46 Who of 50U schal reproue me of
synne 1 if I seie treuthe, vvlii bileuen 36
not to me 1
47 He that is of God, heerith the
wordis of God j therfore 36 heeren not,
for 56 ben not of God.

48 Therfore the Jewis answeriden, and
seiden, "Wlier we seyn not wel, for thou
art a Samaritan, and hast a deuel 1

TYNDALE, 1526.

497)

When he spcaketh a lye, then speaketh
he off hys awne ; for he ys a lyar, and
the father therof.
45 And be cause I tell you the trueth,

therfore beleve ye nott me.

46 Which of you can rebuke me off
synne ? yf I say the trueth, why do not
ye beleve me 1
47 He that is of God, heareth Goddes
wordes ; ye therfore heare them not, be
cause ye are nott of God.

48 Then answered the lewes, and sayde
vnto hym, Saye we nott well, that thou
arte a Samaritan, and hast the devyll 1

49 Jhesu answeride, and seide, I haue
not a deuel, but I honoure my fadir,
and 3e han vnhonourid me.
50 Forsothe I seke not my glorie j
ther- is, that sekith, and demeth.

51 Treuli, treuli, I seie to 30U, if ony
man schal kepe my word, he schal not
Be''' deeth in to with outen ende.

52 Therfor the Jewis seiden, N"ow we
han knowen, for thou hast' a deuel.
Abraham is deed, and the prophetis,
and thou seist. If ony man schal kepe
my word, he schal not taaste deeth in
to with outen ende.

53 Wher thou ert more than oure fadir
Abral^m, that is deed, and the prophetis
ben deede ; whom makist thou thi silf ?

54 Jhesu answeride, If I glorifie my
fiilf, my glorie is no3t ; my fadir is,
that glorifieth me, whom 3e seyn, for he
is 3ouie God.

55 And 30 han not knowen him, for-
Both I liaue knowe him ; and if I schal
seye for I woot not him, I shal be a
lyere lyk to 30U ; but I woot him, and
I kepe his word.

56 Abraham, 3oure fader, ful out ioyede,
that he schulde se my day ; and he 8y3,
and he ioyede.

57 Tlicrforc the Jewis scyden to him,
Tiiou hast not 3it fifty 3eer, and hast
thou seyn Abraham ?

58 Therfore Jhesu seide to hen>, Treuli,
treuli, I seye to 30U, bifore that Abraham
was maad, I am.

49 Jesus answered, I have not the
devyll, butt I honour my father, and ye'
have dishonoured me.

50 I seke nott myne awne prayse ;
there is won, that seketh it, and iudgcth.
51 Verely, verely, I saye vnto you, yf
a man kepe my sayinges, he shall never
se deeth.

52 Then sade the lewes to hym, Nowe
knowe we, that thou hast the devyll.
Abraham is deed, and also the p»ro-
phettes, and yett thou sayest, Yf a man
kepe my sayinge, he shall never tast
deeth.

53 Arte thou greater then oure father
Abraham, which is deed, and the pro-
phettes are deed ; whome makest thou
thy silfe 1
54 Jesus answered, Yf I prayse my
silfe, my prayse is nothynge worth ; hit
is my father, that prayseth me, which
ye saye, is youre God.

55 And yet have ye not knowen hym,
but I knowe hym ; and yf I shuldo saye
I knowe hym nott, I shulde be a lyarc
lyke vnto you ; but I knowe hym, and
kepe his sayinge.

56 Youre father, Abraham, was glad
to se my daye ; and he sawc it, and
reioysed.

57 Then sayde the lewes vi)to hym,
Tliou arte not yet .1. yerc olde, and hast
thou scne Al)rahaiM 1

58 Jesus sayd vnto them, Vciely, verely,
I say vnto you, yer Abi-aham was, 1 am.

59 Tiicrforc thci token stooncs, that

59 Then toke they vpi)e stones, to caste

1

AUC)

3
1

;
;

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

ij> lesus jjan gafalh sik, yah
an«a I'na ;
usiddya us alli, uslei})aiids j^airh midyans
ins, yah wharboda swa.

Chap. IX.

i Yah J>airligaggands,
gauinida maun blindamma us gabaurj^ai.

2 paruh frehun ina siponyos is qi|nind-
ans, Ivabbei, whas frawaurlita, sau, |)au
fadrein is, ei bUnds gabaurans warp 1

3 Andhof iiesus, Nih sa frawaurhta,
iiih fadrein is ; ak ei bairhta waurjjeina
waurstwa Guj^s ana imma.

4 Ik skal waurkyan waurstwa \>\s sand-
yandins niik, unte dags ist ; qimi)) nalits,
J)anei ni manna mag waui-kyan.

5 pan in j^amma fairwhau im, liuha|>

im J)is fairwliaus.

6 pata qi|)ands, gaspaiw dala]?, yah ga-
waurhta fani us |)amma spaiskuldra, yah
gasmait Vmma ana augona ])ata fani
j)amma blindin,

7 Yah qa}) du imma, Gagg, pwahan in
swunifsl iSiloamis, ))atei gaskeiryada, In-
Galai]?, yah af[)Woh, yah qam

san(b"})S.
saiwhands.

8 panuh garaznans, yah J>ai saiwhand-
ans ina faur|)is, Jjatei is bidagwa was,
qe|jun, Niu sa ist, saei sat, aihtronds?

9 Sumaih qe|)un, patci sa 1st ; sumaili,
qa]),

patei gal oiks j?amma ist.
patci ik im.

1\> is

woldon liine torfian ;
bediglode, and eode of dam temple, .

se Haelend hine

.

Chap. IX.

^i Da se Hselend for, c1a
geseah he anne man de waes blind ge-
boren.

2 And his leorning-cnilitas hine acsodon
and cwsedon, Lareow, hwa^t syngotle,
des, odde his magas, dast he waere blind
geboren 1

3 Se Haelend andswarode and cwa3J),
Ne syngode he, ne his magas ; ac daet
Godes weorc waere ges>vutelod on him.

4 Me gebyraj? to wyi'canne does weorc
de me sende, da hwile de hit dieg is
niht cym)?, donne nan man w}Tcan ne
mseg.

5 Ic eom middan-eardes leoht, da hwile

de ic on middan-earde eom.

6 Da he das ping saede, da spaette he
on da eorpan, and worhte fenn of his
spatle, and smyrede mid dam fenne ofer
his eagan,

7 And cwa^l? to him, Ga, and jnveah de
He for, and

on Syloes mere,
])w6h hine, and com geseonde

8 "Witodlice his neah-gebnras, and da
do hine gesawon, da he wii?dla wa'S,
cwaedon, Hu nis dis se, de sa^t, and
WJedlode 1

9 Sume cwaedon. He hyt is ; sume
He

cwaedon, Nese, ac is him gelic.
cwaej) soplice, Ic hit eom.

10 panuh qe])un du imma, Whaiwa

10 Da cwaedon hig to him, Hu waeron

u.shiknodc(kin |)us ))0 augona?

1

Andliof yains yah (]ap, Manna liait-
ans iesus, fani gawaurlita, yah l)ismait
mis augona, yah qa)> mis, Gagg, afjiwali-
an in |)ata swumfsl Siloamis ;
i{) ik ga-
hii]», yali bi]>wahands, ussawh.

dine oagan ge-openede 1

1

He andswarode and cwa^|>, Se man,
de is gencmned Haelend, worhte fcnn,
and smyrede mine eagan, and cwae}> to
me, Ga to Syloes mere, and jnveah de
and ic code, and |)w6h me, and geseah.

T 2 Qojmn |nm du imma, "Whar ist sa ?

12 Da cwaedon hig to him, Hwar is

Ij) is (|a|), Ni wait.

he 1 Da cwa^p he, Ic nat.

13 Gatiuliand ina du Fareisaiura jjana

Hig lacddon to dam Phariseon done

1

saei was blinds.

de dar blind wres.

1

1

IX. I-I3.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

thei scbulden caste in to him ;
sotlili
Jhesu liidde him, and wente out of the
temple

TYNDALE, 1526.

497
at hym ; but Jesus hid hym silfe, and
went out of the temple

Chap. IX.

i And Jhesu passinge,

sy5 a man blynd fro the hirthe.

2 And his disciplis axiden him, Raby,'''
who synnede, this man, or his fadir and
modir, that he schulde be born blynd ?

3 Jhesu answeride, Nether this man
synnede, neither his fadir and moder ;
but that the werkis of God be schewid
in hym.

4 It bihoueth me for to worche the
werkis of him that sente me, the while
the day is ; the ny3t schal come, whanne
no man may worche,

5 Hou longe I am in the world, I am

Chap. IX.

i And as Jesus passed
by, he sawe a man which was blynde
from his birth.

2 And his disciples axed hym, sayinge.
Master, who did synne, this man, or his
father and mother, that he was borne
blynde %

3 Jesus answered. Nether this man
hathe synned, nor yet his father and
mother ; but that the workes of Goel
shulde be shewed on hym.

4 I must worke the workes off hym
that sent me, whill it is daye ; the nyglit
commeth, when no man can worke.

5 As longe as I am in the world e, I am

the li3t of tlie world.

the light of the worlde.

6 Whanne he hadde seid thes thingis,
he spette in to erthe, and made cley of
the spotle, and leyde^ the cley on his
y^en,

7 And seide to him, Go, and be thou
wayschen in the watir^ of Siloe, that is
Therfore he wente,
interpretid, Sent.
and waiscuide, and cam seynge.

8 And so nei3eboris, and thei that
hadden seyn hym bj^ore, for he was a
beggere, seiden, Wher this is not he,
til at sat, and befjf'ide 1

9 Othere men seiden, For tliis it is

;

othcre men forsothe, Nay, but it
lyk of him.
am.

is a
Forsoth he seide, For I

;eiiii|

10 Therfore thei seiden to liim, IIow

ben tliin y3en oj>enyd to tliee?

1

He answeride. The ilkc man, that
is Hcid Jhesu, made cley, and anoyntide
myn y3en, and seide to me, Go thou to
the watir^ of Siloe, and waischc ; and I
wente, and waischide, and 8y3.

12 And thei seiden to him, WIkt is

hel He seith, I woot not.

6 As sone as he had thus spoken, he
spate on the grounde, and made claye
of the spetle, and rubbed the claye on
the eyes off the blynde,

7 And sayde vnto hym, Goo, wesshe
the in the pole of Siloe, which by in
terpretacion signifieth, Sent. He went
his waye, and wesshed, and cam agayne
seinge.

8 The neghboures, and they that had
sene hym before, howe that he was a
begger, saytle. Is not this he, that sate,
and begged ?

9 Some sayde. This is he ; other sayd,
He is lyke hym. He hym silfe sayde,
I am even he.

10 They sayde vnto hym, Howe are

thyne eyes openned then 1

1

He answered and sayde. The man,
that is called Jesus, made claye, and
anoynted myne eyes, and sayd vnto
me. Goo to the pole Siloe, and wesshe ;
I went, and wesshed, and reccavcd my
sight.

I 2 They sayde vnto hym, Where is he ?

He sayde, I cannot tell.

i3Tliei ledcn him that was l^Iyiid to

13 Then brought they to the IMiaiises

the Pharisees.

him that a litcll before was blynde.

Kk

;

;

498

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Joux

14 Wasuh )>an subbato, jjan |>ata fani
inima

uslauk

yah

gawaurlita lesus,
augona.

15 Aftra ]>an freliun ina yali |:ai Farei-
is qaj) yali

saicis, Avhaiwa ussawh.
] aim, Fani galagida mis ana augona
yah af|nvoli, yah saiwha.

Ijj

16 Qc|)un })an sumai J)ize Fareisaie,
Sa manna nist fram Cuja, )'ancle sabbate
Suniaih qe|)un, Whaiwa
daga ni witai[).
marr manna frawaurhts swaleikos taikn-
ins tauyan 1 Yah missaqiss war]) mij>
im.

17 Qe})unuh du |>amma faur])is blindin
aftra, pu wha qiJMS bi jjana, ei uslauk
J)us augona]
1]> is qajmh, patci prau-
fetus ist.

18 Ni galaubidedim |?an ludaieis bi
is blinds wesi, yah ussewhi,

i'na,
unte atwopidedun ))aus fadrein is,
ussaiwhandins.

l^atei

))is

14 Hit wses reste-daeg, da se Ilselend
worhte daet fenn, and his eagan untyndc.

15 Eft da Pharisei hyne acsedon, hii
he gesawe. He cw£e}) to him, He dyde
fenn ofer mine eagan ; and ic J)w6h, and
ic geseo.

J 6 Sume da Pharisei cwsedon, Nis dcs
man of Gode, de reste-dreg ne hylt. Sume
cwsedon, Hii mjeg synful man das tucn
wyrcan ] And hig fliton him betwconan.

17 Hig cwsedon eft to dam bllndan,
Hw?et segst du be dam, de dine eagan
uutynde ] He cwa^J), He is witega.

18 Ne gelyfdon da ludeas be him, dut
he blind wscre, and gesawe, serdam de
hig clypodon his magas, de gesawon.

19 Yah frehun ins, qijjandans, Sau "ist
sa sunus izwar, |)anei yus qij)i|>,
j^atei
blinds gabaurans waur])i ? whaiwa nu
saiwhij) ]

20 Andhofun })an im. Jjai fadrein 'is, yah
qej)un, Witum, |)atei sa ist sunus unsar,
yah jjatei blinds gabaurans war])

19 And acsodon hig, and cwsedon. Is
dis eower sunu, de ge secgaj), daH blind
wsere acenned 1 hiinieta gesyhj) he mi 1

20 Hys magas him andswaredon, and
cwsedon, We witon, diet des ys lire
sunu, and diet he wa?s blind acenned ;

21 1\> whaiwa nu saiwhij), ni witum,
ai)5|)au whas uslauk imma ]io augona,
weis ni witum ; silba uswahsans ist, ina
fraihnij), silba bi sik rodyai.

21 We nyton, hiimeta he nii gesyhji,
ne hwa his eagan untynde ; acsiaj) hine
sylfne, ylde he ha^fj), sprece for hinc
sylfne.

22 pata qejnin })ai fadrein is, unte
ohtcdun sis ludaiuns ; yu|)an auk ga-
qc|)un sis ludaieis, ei yabai whas ina
andhaihaiti Christu, utaua swuagogais
wair])ai.

22 His magas sprsecon das ))ing, for-
dam de hig ondredon da ludeas ; da
gedihton da ludeas, gif hwa Crist and-'
ette di^t he wsere, butan hyra gcfer-
roedene.

23 Duh|)e |)ai berusyos is qe])un, patei

23 Fordam cwsedon his magas, He

uswahsans ist, silban fraihni[).

24 Atwopidedun jnm an|-'aramnia sinj)a
jmna mannan, saei was blinds, yah qe})un
du imnia, Gif hauhcin Gu|>a ; weis wit-
iim, |)atei sa manna frawaurhts ist.

25 panuh andhof yains, Yabai fra-
waurhts ist, ik ni wait ; );at-ain wait, ei
blinds was, ij) nu saiwha.

ha>f|) ylde, ticsiaj) hinc sylfne.

24 Da clypcdon hig eft done man, de
cvr blind wa'S, and cwanlon to him, Sege
Gode "vvuldor ; we witon, dat he is
synful.

25 And he cwae]?, Gif he synful is, diet
ic nat ; an j'ing ic wat, dast ic wa»s
blind, and daet ic nu geseo.

4

;

1

;

;

IX. 14-25.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

499

Forsoth it was saboth, whanne Jhesu

1

made cley, and openyde his y^en.

15 Eft Pharisees axiden him, how he
Sothly he seide to hem,

hadde seyn.
He puttide to me cley on the y3eii
and I waischide, and I se.

16 Therfore summe of Pharisees seiden,
This man is not of God, for he kepith
not the saboth. Othere men seyden, How
may a man synnere do thes syngnys^'''
And dyuysioun was a mong hem.

17 Therfore thei seyn eftsoone to the
blynd man, What seist thou of him,
that openyde thin y5en ? Sothli he seide,
For he is a prophete.

18 Therfore Jewis bileueden not of
him, for he was blynd, and hadde seyn,
til thei clepiden his fadir and modir,
that hadde seyn.

19 And thei axiden hem, seyinge, Is
this 5oure sone, whom ^e seyn, for he is
born blynd ] hou therfore seeth he now 1

20 His fadir and modir answeriden to
hem, and seyden. We witen, for this is
cure sone, and for he is born blynd ;

21 Sothli how lie seeth now, we witen
not, or who openyde his y3en, we witen
not ; axe ^e him, he hath age, speke he
of him silf.

22 His fadir and modir seidcn thes
thingis, for thei dredden Jewis ; forsoth
now the Jewis hadden conspirid, that if
ony man knowlechide him Crist, he
Bchulde be don out of the synagoge.

23 Therfore his fadir and modir seidcn,

For he hath age, axe 3c him.

24 Tlierfore eftsoone thei clepiden the
•nan, that was blynd, and seyden to him,
3yue tliou glorie to God ; we witen, for
til is man is a Byniicr.

25 The) fore he Hcide, If he is a synner,
I woot not ; o thing 1 woot, for wliannc
I was blynd, now 1 so.

(1»

14 Hit was the saboth daye, when
Jesus made the claye, and opened his
eyes.

15 Then agayne the Pharises also axed
hym, howe he had receaved his sight.
He sayde vnto them. He putt claye apon
myne eyes ; and I wasshed, and I se.

16 Then sayde some of the Pharises,
This man is not of God, be cause he
kepetli not the saboth daye.
Other
sayde, Howe can a man that is a synner
myracles "? And there was
do suche
strj'fe a monge them.

17 Then spake they vnto the blynde
agayne, What sayst thou of hym, be
cause he hath openned thyne eyes ? And
he sayd. He ys a prophet.

18 The lewes did nott beleve off the
felowe, howe that he was blynde, and
had receaved hys sight, vntill they had
called the father and mother off him,
that had receaved his sight.

19 And they axed them, saying, Ys
this youre sonne, whome ye saye was
borne blynde 1 howe doth he nowe se
then ]

20 His father and mother answered
them, and sayde. We wote wele, that
this is oure sonne, and that he was borne
blynde

2

Butt by what meanes he nowe seyth,
that can we nott tell, or who hath open-
ned his eyes, can avc nott tell ', he is
olde ynough, axe hym, lett hym answer
for hym sylfe off thynges that pertayue
to hym sylfe.

22 Suche wordcs spake his father and
mother, be cause they feared the lewes ;
for the lewes had conspyred all redy,
that yff cny man did confcsse that he
was Christ, he shulde be excommunicat
out of the sinngoge.

23 Therfore sayde his father and mo-

ther, He is olde ynough, axe hym.

24 Then agayne called they the man,
tliat was blynde, and sayd vnto hym,
Geve G()«l the prayse ; we knowe, thatt
thys man ys a synner.

25 lie answered and sayde. Whither

he be a synner or noo, 1 cannot tell
won thynge 1 am sure ofi', that I was
blynde, and nowe I se.

K k 2

;

1

500

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

26 paniih qe})un tiftra, Wlia ^atawida

26 Da cwaedon hig to him, Hwajt dyde

Jjus 1 wliaiwa uslauk |)us augoiui 1

he de ? hu ontynde he dine eagan ]

27 Andhof im, Qa|> izwis yu, yah ni
liausideduj) ; wlia aftra ^viIei}? hausyan]
yali yus wilcijj |!anima siponyos
ibai

wair))aii 1

28 panuli lailoun imma, yah qe})un, pu
is siponeis J>amma ; ip weis Mose sipon-
yos siyiim.

29 Weis witum, j^atei du Mose rodida

Gujj ;

ij) })aiia ni kunnum, whajjro ist.

30 Andhof sa manna, yah qa|; du im.
Auk in |)amma siklaleik ist, jratei yus ni
witu}) wha])ro ist, yah usUiuk mis aug-
ona.
31 Witumuh Ipan, j)atei Guj> frawaurht-
aim ni andhauseif), ak yabai whas gu])-
blostreis ist, yah wilyan is tauyiji, })am-
ma hauseijj.
32 Fram aiwa ni gahausi)^ was, jratei
iislukijj whas augoiia blindamma ga-
bauranamma
33 Nih wesi sa fram Gu}^a, ni mahtedi

tauyan ni waiht.

34 Andhofun, yah qejjun du nnnia, In
frawaurhtim [)U gabaurans warst alls,
yah |?u laiseis unsis "i Yah uswaurpun
inuna ut.

35 Hausida lesus,

})atei uswaurpun
iinma ut ; yah bigat ina, qa)>uh du im-
ma, pu gaulaubeis du sunau Gu])s 1

36 Andhof yains, yah qaj). An whas ist,

Frauya, ei galaubyau du imma ^

37 Q'^}' l'^^^ imma Icsus, Yah gasawht
ina, yah saei rodei)) mi

jjus, sa ist.

J)

38 Ijj

is qajmh,
Yah inwait ina.

Galaubya,

Frauya.

39 Yah qa|) Icsus, Du stauai, ik in
|)amma fairwhau qam, ei j^ai unsaiwhand-
saiwliaina, yah ])ai saiwhandans,
aiis,

blindai wair|niiiia.

40 Yah hausidedun

sumai |)ata,
yah qo|um du innna,
bliudai siyum ?

))ize

Fareisaie
|)ai wisandans mi)j imma,
Ibai yah wcis

27 He andswarode him and cwa^j), Ic
eow seede ser, and ge gehyrdon ; hwi
wylle ge hyt eft gehyrani ewede ge
wylle ge beon his leorning-cnihtas 1

dii

his

28 Da wyrigdon hig hiiie, and cwaedon,
leorning-cniht j we synd

Si
Moyses leorning-cnilitas.
29 We witon, dait God spaec wid Moy-
sen ; nyte we, hwanon des is.

30 Se man andswarode, and cwaej) to
him, Dset is wundorlic, dcet ge nytou
hwanon he is, and he untynde mine
eagan.

We witon s6))lice, daet God ne ge-
hyrjj synfulle, ac gif hwa is Gode ge-
c )ren, and his willan wyrc]), done he
gchyr}).

3

32 Ne gehyrde we neefre on worulde,
da't senig ontynde daes eagan de ware
blind geboren ;

33 Ne mihte des nan |nng don, gif he
niere of Gode.

34 Hig andswaredon, and cwaedon to
him, Eall dd eart on synnum geboren,
and du Iserst us ] And hig drifon hine
ut.

35 Da se Haelend gehyrde, dret hig
hync drifon ut ; da cwjej) he to him, da
he hine gemitte, Gelyfst dii on Godes
sunn ?

36 He andswarode, and cwoej^, Hwylc

is, Drihten, daet ic on hine gelyfe 1

37 And se Hseleud cwie}^ to him, Du
hine gesawe, and se de wid de sprycj?,
se hit is.

38 Da cw8e}> he, Drihten, ic gelyfe.
And he feoll nyder, and ge-eadmcdde
hyne.

39 And se Haelend cwa^j) to him, Ic
com on dysne middan-eard, to demenne,
da}t da seoolon geseon, de ne geseoJ>,
and beon blinde, da de geseo|\

40 Da daet gehyrdon da Pharisei, de
dii cwaedon hig to

mid him wac-ron,
hym, Cwyst dii synd we blinde 1

41 Qaj) im lesus, !)> blindai wescij), ni

41 And se Haelend cwap)> to him, Gif

IX. 26-41.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, irt2 6.

501

26 Therfore tbei seiden to him, What
dide he to thee ] how opeuyde he thin
ysen'?

27 He answeride to hem, I seide to
50U now, and ^e herden ; what woleu 36
eftsoone heerel wher and 56 wolen be
jnaad his disciplis ]

28 Therfore thei wariden^ him, and
seiden, Be thou his disciple ; we ben
disciplis of Moyses.
29 We witen, for God spak to Moyses ;
forsoth we witen no3t this, of whennis
he is.

30 The like man answeride, and seide
to hem, Forsoth in this thing is wonder-
ful, that 5e witen not of whennis he is,
and he hath opened myn y5en.

3 1 Sothli we witen, for God heerith
not synneris, but if ony man is wor-
shiper of God, and doth his wille, hym
he heerith.

32 Fro the world it is not herd, that
ony man openyde the y3en of a blynd
born man ;
33 No but this were of God, he my^te
not do ony thing.

34 Thei answeriden, and seiden to
him, Thou art al boren in synnes, and
techist thou vs ^ And thei castiden out
him.

35 Jhesu herde, for thei ban cast out
him ; and whanne he hadde founden
him, he seide to him, Bileuest thou in
to the sone of God ]

36 He answeride, and seide. Lord, who

is he, that I bileue in to him ]

37 And Jhesu seide to him. And thou
hast seyn him, and he it is, that spekith
with thee.

38 And he seide. Lord, I bileue. And

he fallinge doun, worshipide him.

39 Tlierfore Jhesu seide to liim, I cam
in to this world, in to dom, that thei
that seen not, se, and thei that seen,
be maad Ijlyride.

40 And Humme of the Pharisees herden,
that wcrcii with him, and tlici seiden to
him, Wlier and we ben blynde ?

4 r Jhesu seide to Iicm, If 36 weren

26 Then sayde they to him agaync,
What did he to the '? howe opened he
thyne eyes 1

27 He answered them, I tolde you yer-
whyle, and ye did nott heare ; wherfore
wolde ye heare ytt agayne 1 wyll ye
alsoo be hys disciples ?

28 Then rated they hym, and sayde.
Thou arte hys disciple ; we are Moses
disciples.

29 We are sure, that God spake wyth
Moses ; thys felowe we knowe not, from
whence he ys.

30 The man answered, and sayde viito
them. This is a merveleous thynge, that
ye wote nere whence he is, and yet hath
he openned myne eyes.
31 We knowe wele ynought, that God
heareth noo synners, but yf eny man be
a worshipper of God, and do what his
will is, him heareth he.

32 Sence the world e began was it nott
herde, that eny man openned the eyes
off won that was borne blind ;

33 If this man were not of God, he

coulde have done noo thjmge.

34 They answered, and sayd vnto him.
Thou arte altogedder borne in synne,
and dost thou teache vs 1 And they cast
hym out.

35 Jesus herde, that they had excom-
municate him ; and as sone as he had
founde hym, he sayd vnto hym, Doest
thou bcleve on the sonne of God 1

36 He answered, and sayde, And who
ys yt, Lorde, that I myght beleve on
hym?
37 And Jesus sayde vnto hym. Thou
hast both sene hym, and he it is, that
talketh with the.

38 And he sayde, Lorde, I beleve.

And worshipped hym.

39 Jesus sayde, I am come vnto iudge-
ment, into this worlde, that they which
se nott, niyght sc, and they which se,
myght l)C made blynde.

40 And some off the Plmrises, whych
were wyth hym, herde these wordes,
and sayde vnto hym. Are we then
])lynde 1

4 I Jesus sayde vnto them, Yf yc were

2

;

;

502

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

hui liabaidedcij) frawaurlitais ;
nil
qi})ij?, patei gasaiwliam, ei])au frawaurlits
izvvara jjairhwisi]?.

ij?

ge blinde Avseron, na?fde ge nane synne ;
mi ge secga]>, dtet ge gescon, dmt is
eowre syn.

Chap. X.

i Amen, amen, qij^a izwis,
saei inn ni ats'a.i^git' jjairli daur in gardan
lambe, ak steigi|> alya})ro, sail liliftus ist
yah waidedya.

Chap. X.

"''i

S6)>, ic secge eow, se
de ne gaej? a3t dam geate into sceapa
falde, ac styhj) elles ofer, he is ])eof and
scea|)a.

2 I\> sa inngaggands })airli daur, haird-

2 Se de in-gse]) set dam geate, he is

eis ist lambe.
3 pammnh daiirawards iisluki|>, yah j^o
lamba stibnai is hausyand, yah j?o swe-
sona lamba haiti)? bi namin, yah ustiuhi)>
yo.

4 Yah |>an ]>o swesona ustiuhij?, faura

im gaggij^, yah ])0 lamba ina laistyand
unte kunnun stibna is.

5 1]) framajjyana ni laistyand, ak jjliiih-
and faura imma ; unte ni kunnun j)ize
framajjyane stibna.

sceapa hyrde.

3 Diene se geat-weard la-t in, and da
sceap gehyra}; his stefne, and he ncm|)
his agene sceap be naman, and Isct hig

lit.

4 And donne he his agene sceap Iset
ut, he gse]> beforan him, and da sceap
him fylia]) ; fordam de hig gecnawaj)
his stefne.

5 Ne fylia}) hig uncudum, ac fleo)? fram
him ; fordam de hig ne gecneowon un-
ciidra stefne.

6 po gayukon qa]) im lesus ;

'i]> yainai

6 Dis bigspell se Haelend him saede

ni frojjun wha was jjatei rodida du im.

hig nyston hwset he spra3C to him.

7 paniili qa]) aftra du im lesus, Amen,
amen, qi})a izwis, ])atei ik im daur |)ize
lambe.

8 Allai swa managai swe qemun, ])iubos
sind yah waidcdyans, akei ni hausidedun
im j)0 lamba.

9 Ik ini |)ata daur.

whas inngaggi]), ganisi})
yah utgaggi}), yah winya bigitij).

pairh mik yabai
; yah inngaggij),

7 Eft se Hselend cwse)) to him, So)?, ic

eow secge, ic eom sceapa gcat.

8 Ealle da de comon, waeron Jieofas
and scea)»an, ac da sceap hig ne ge-
hyrdon.

9 Ic eom geat.

Swa hwylc swa })urh
me gse\), by)) hal ; and g<v\> in, and ut,
and fint lajse.

10 piubs ni qimij>, nibai ei stilai, yah
i|? i'k qam, ei

iifsnei})ai, yah fraqistyai ;
libain aigeina, yah managizo aigcina.

10 peof ne cym)), biiton dret he stele,
ic com, to dam
and slca, and fordo ;
d{\3t hig habbon lif, and habbon genoh."'^

11 Ik Vm hairdeis gods; hairdeis sa

11 Ic eom gild h3Tde ; god hyrde sylj)

goda saiwala scina lagyi|) fjuir lamba.

his lif for his sceapum.

1

Ij> asneis, yah saei nist hairdeis,
ni sind lamba, swesa gasaiwhi|)
])izci
•\vulfqimandan,yah bilci})i)) ))aim lambam,
yah j'liuhij)
; yah sa wulfs frawilvvij) j'O,
yah distahyij) ])o lamba.

12 Se hyra, se de nis hyrde, and se
de nah da sceap, donne he done wulf
gesyh]', donne flyhj) he, and forla?t da
sceap ; and se wulf nim]>, and todrif)) da
sceap.

13 Ij) sa asneis afj^liuhij), unte asneis

13 Se hyra flyhj), fordam de he bip

X. I-I3.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1K26.

503

blynde, 50 scliiilclen not haue synne ;
but now 56 seyn, For we seen, 30ure
synne dwellith.

blynde, ye shulde have noo synne ; but
nowe ye saye, VYe se, therfore youre
synne remayneth.

Chap. X.

i Treuli, treuli, I seie to
50U, he that cometh not in by the dore
in to the fold of the scheep, but sti3eth
vp by another weye, is ny5t thef and
day thef.

2 Forsothe he that entrith by the dore,

Chap. X.

i Uerely, verely, I saye
vnto you, whosoever entre th not in by
the dore into the shepe folde, but clym-
eth vppe some other waye, he is a tliefe
and a robber.

2 He thatt goeth in by the dore, is the

is tlie schepherde of the scheep.

shepheerde of the shepe.

3 To this the porter openeth, and the
scheep heeren his vois, and he clepith
his owne scheep by name, and ledith
out hem.

4 And whanne he hath sent out his
owne scheep, he goth bifore hem, and
the scheep suwen him ; for thei knowen
his vois.

5 Sothli thei suwen not an alien, but
flecn fro him ; for thei ban not knowen
the voys of alyens.

6 Jhesu seide to hem this prouerbe ;
forsoth thei knewen not what he spak
to hem.

7 Therfore Jhesu seide to hem eftsoone,
Treuli, treuli, I seie to 50U, for I am the
dore of the scheep,

8 Alle how manye euere camen, ben
ny3t theues and day theues, but the
scheep herden not hem.

9 I am the dore.

If ony man schal
entre by me, he schal be saued ; and
he schal go yn, and schal go out, and
he schal fynde lesewis.

10 A ni^t theef cometh not, no but
that he stele, and sle, and leese ; I cam,
tliat thei haue lyf, and haue more pleu-
teuously.

Ill am a good schepherde ; a good
schepherde 3yucth Iiis soule ^ for his
scheep.

12 Forsoth a marcliaunt,^ and that is
not schepherde, whos ben not tlie scheep
his owne, sccth a wolf corny ngc, and he
Iceueth^ the Hchecp, and (leetli ; and the
wolf rauyschith, and disparplitht the
scheep.

3 To this man the porter openneth the
dore, and the shepe heare hys voyce,
and he calleth hys awne shepe by name,
and leadeth them out.

4 And when he hath sent forthe hys
awne shepe, he goeth before them, and
the shepe folowe hym ; for they knowe
hys voyce.
5 A straunger they Avill nott folowe,
butt wyll flye from hym ; for they knowe
nott the voyce of straungers.

6 This manner of sayinge spake Jesus
vnto them ; and they vuderstode nott
what thynges they were whych he spake
vnto them.

7 Then sayde Jesus vnto them agayne,
Verely, verely, I saye vnto you, thatt I
am the dore of the shepe.

8 All even as many as cam before me,
are theves and robbers, but the shepe
did not heare them.

9 I am the dore.

By me yf eny man
enter in, he shalbe safe ; and shall goo
in, and out, and fynde pasture.

10 The thefe commeth not, but for to
steale, and kyll, and destroye ; I cam,
that they myght have lyfe, and have yt
more aboundantly.

Ill am a goode shepliecrd ; a goode

shepheerd geveth his lyfe for his shepe.

12 An heyred servaunt, which is not
the shej)hcerd, nether the shepe are his
awne, seith the wolfc commynge, and
leveth the shepe, and flyeth ; and the
wolfe catchcth, and scattereth the shepe.

13 Forsoth the marchauut flcctli, for

13 The heyred servaunt flyeth, be cause

9

rm

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

ist, yah ni kar-'ist I'na |)izc lambe,

ahj^rod, and him ne gebyra}) to dam
sceapum.

14 Ik ini liairdeis sa gotla, yali kann

14 Ic com god h}Tde, and ic gecmlwe

meina, yah kunuun iiiik |)o ineiiia.

m;ne seeap, and big gecnuwaj) me.

15 Swaswe kann mik atta, yah ik kann
attan ; yali saiwala mcina lagya faiir |)0
laniba.

16 Yah an}?ara lamba aih, ]?oei ni sind
|)is awistris, yah |)0 skal briggan, yah
stibnos meinaizos hausyand ; yah wairj?-
and ain awe))i ains hairdeis.

17 Duhjje atta mik friyo)?, unte ik

15 Swa, min faeder can me, ic can
minne faeder ; [and ic sylle min agen
lif for minum sceapum].^

16 And ic haebbe odre sceap, da ne
synd of disse heorde, and hit gebyra}?
da>t ic Iscde da, and liig gehyra[> mine
stefne ; and hyt by)) an heord and an
hyrde.

17 Fordam fteder me lufa)?, fordam de

higya saiwala nieina, ei aftra nimau ]>o.

ic sylle mine sawle, and big eft nime.

18 Ni whashun nimi}; ])0 af [mis, akei
ik lagya )?o af]^ mis silbin.
Wahlufni
haba aflagyan ]>o, yah waldiifni haba
po anabusu nam at
aftra niman ])0.
attin meinamma.

panuh missaqiss aftra war))

mi|)

1

ludaium in j)ize waurde.

20 Qe])unuh managai ize, Unhuljjon
habaij), yah dwalmoj? ; wha ]?amma haus-
ei\>1

21 Sumaih qejmn, po wam*da ni sind
Ibai mag unhulj;o

imhul]?on habandins.
blindaim augona uslukan ?

22 War)) jjan inniuyi})a in lairusaul-

18 Ne nim)) big n^n man ?et mc, ac
Isete big fram me sylfum.
Ic ha?bbe
anw^ald mine sawle to alsetanne, and
ic ha?l)be anweald big eft to nimanne.
Dis bebod ic nam a?t minum faeder.

19 Eft waes ungejAvsernes geworden
betwyx dam ludeum for dysum spraec-
um,

20 Manega hira cwsedon, Dcofol is on

him, and he wet ; hwi hlyste ge him 1

21 Sume cwaedon, Ne synd na dis
Cwyst dii ma^g
wodes mannes word.
w6d man blindra manna eagan ontyn-
anf

22 Da waeron tempi -halgunga on Hieru-

wmai, yah wintrus was.

salem, and hit Wivs winter.

23 Yah wharboda lesiis in alli, in

23 And se Haelcnd code on dam temple,

ubizwai Saulaumonis,

24 panuh birunnun ina ludaieis, yah
qejmn du imma, Und wha saiwala uns-
ara hahis 1
siyais Christus,
q\\> unsis andaugiba.

yabai J)U

25 Andhof Icsus, Qaj? izwis, yah ni
galaubeij) ; waurstwa |)oei ik tauya in
namin attins meinis, ])0 weitwodyand bi
mik.

26 Akei yus ni gnlaubcij>, unte ni siyu})

lambe mcinaize, swaswe qa]) izwis.

27 Lamba meina stibnai meinai haus-
yand, yah ik kann |)0, yah laistyand
mik.

28 Yah ik libain aiweinon giba im,
yah ni fraqistnand aiw, yah ni frawilwij)

on Salomones portice.

24 Da bestodon da ludeas hyne litan,
and cwacdon to him, Hii lange gaelst dii
ure lif 1 scge us opeulice, hwivdcr dii
Crist sy.

25 Se Haelend him andswarode and
cwa?)), Ic spece to eow, and ge ne ge-
lyfa|) ; da weorc de ic w}Tce on mines
faider naman, da cyda)) gewitncsse be
me.

26 Ac ge ne gelyfa)?, fordam de ge

ne synd of minum sceapum ....

27 Mine sceap gehyra)) mine stefne,
and ic gecnawe big, and big folgia)) me.

28 And ic him sylle ece lif, and hig
ne forwurda)) nacfre, and ne nim|> hig

X. 14-28.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

505

5

he is a marchaunt, and it perteyneth
not to him of the scheep.

14 I am a good schepherde, and I
knowe my scheep, and my scheep knowen
me.

15 As my fadir hath knowun me, and
I knowe the fadir ; and I putte my lyf
for my scheep.

16 And I haue othere scheep, that hen
not of this folde, and it bihoueth me
for to leede hem to, and thei schuien
heere my vois ; and it schal be maad o
fold and o schepherde.

17 Therfore the fadir loueth me, for I

putte my soule, that eftsoone I take it.

18 No man takith it fro me, but I
putte it fro my silf.
I haue power for
to putte it, and I haue power for to take
This maundement I haue
it eftsoone.
take of my fadir.

19 And so

dissencioun was maad

among the Jewis for thes wordis.

he is an heyred servaunt, and careth not
for the shepe.

14 I am that goode ahepheerd, and
knowe my shepe, and am knowen of
myne.

As my father knoweth me, even soo
knowe I my father ; and I geve my sylfe
for my shepe.

1

16 And other shepe I have, which are
not off this folde, them also must I
bringe, and they shall heare my voyce ;
and there shalbe won flocke and won
shepheerde.

17 Therfore doth my father love me,
be cause I put my lyfe from me, that
I myght take it asfayne.

18 No man taketh it from me, butt I
put ytt away off my sylfe.
I have power
to put it from me, and power I have to
Thys commaundment
take it agayne.
have I receaved of my father.

19 Agayne there was dissencion amonge

the lewes for these sayinges.

20 Forsoth manye of hem seiden, He
hath a deuel, and maddith ;^ what heeren
je him ?

21 Othere men seiden, Thes wordis
beth not of a man hauynge a fend.
Wher a deuel may opene the y^en of
blynde men 1

22 Forsothe newe feestis of halwing of
the temple ben maad in Jerusalem, and
it was wyntir.

23 And Jhesu walkide in the temple,

20 And many of them sayd. He hath
the devyll, and is madde ; why heare ye
hym]

21 Other sayde. These are nott the
wordes off hym that hath the devyll.
Can the devyll open the eyes off the
blynde 1

22 Hit was at Jerusalem the feaste of

the dedicacion, and itt was wynter.

23 And Jesus walked ... in Solomons

in the porche of Salomon.

hail.

24 Tlierfore Jewis enyyrowneden him,
and seiden to him, Hou longe dost thou
a wey oure soule ? if thou ert Crist, seie
to vs opynly.

25 Jhesu answeride to hem, I speke to
50U, and 5e bileuen not : the workis that
I do in the name of my fadir, thes beren
witnessing of me.

24 Tlien cam the lewcs rounde aboute
hym, and sayde vnto hym, Howe longe
dost thou make vs doute 1
yfl' thou be
Cliryst, tell vs playnly.

25 Jesus answered them, I tolde you,
and ye beleve nott ; the workca that I
do in my fathers name, beare witnes off
me.

26 But and 3c bileuen not, for 3c ben

not of my scheep

27 My sclicepe lieoren my vois, and I

knowe iieni, and thei suen me.

26 Butt ye beleve not, because ye are

not of my shepe, as I sayde vnto you.

27 Aly shepe heare niy voyce, and I

knowe them, and they folowc mc.

28 And I 3yuc to hem cuorchistiiig lyf,
and thei schuien not perische in to with

2H And I geve vnto them eternal 1 lyfo,
uiid thry shall never pcrisshe, nether

;

.Mm

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

>vlia.sliun |)0 us hanclau mciiiai*.

nan man of mmre handa.

29 Atta mcins jjatei fragaf mis, maizo
allaim ist ; yah ni aiw ainsliun mag
frawihvan |)0 us liandau attins meinis.

29 Da3t de min fa^der me seahlc, is
maciTe donne scnig oder }>in;,' ; and nc
moeg hit nan man niman of mines fa3der
handa.

30 Ik yah atta meins ain siyu.
31 Nemun aftra stainans Jjai ludaieis,

30 Ic and feeder synd an.
31 Da ludeas njimon stanas, da^t hig

ei waurpeina ana ina.

32 Anclhof im Icsus, Managa goda
waurstwa ataugida 'izwis us attin mein-
amma, in wharyis })ize waurstwe stainei))
mik ?
33 Andhofun imma jjai ludaieis, In
godis waurstwis ni stainyam |juk, ak in
"vvayamercins, yah j^atei |?u, manna wis-
ands, tauyis |?uk silban du Gu|)a.

34 Andhof im lesus, Niu ist gamclij?
in witoda izwaramma, Ik qa|), Guda
siyuj) ?

35 Yabai yainans qaj> guda, du jjaimei
waurd Gu])S war|i, yah ni maht ist ga-
tairan };ata gamelido,

36 panei atta gaweihaida, yah insand-
ida in Jjana fairwhu, yus (\i\>i]>,
j^atei
wayameryau, unte qa]', Sunus Gu|)S im ?

37 Niba tauyau waurstwa attins meinis,

ni galaubeij) mis ;

|)aim waurstwam galaubyaij) ;

38 Ij> yabai tauyau, niba mis galaub-
ei
yiii|),
ufkunnai|> yah galaubyaij), J)atci in mis
atta, yah ik in imma.

39 Sokidedun ina aftra gafahan, yah

usiddya us handum ize.

40 Yah gahaij) aftra ufar laurdanu, in
])ana stad ]>arci was lohannes frumist
daupyands, yah saHda yainar.

41 Yah managai qcmun at imma, yah
qe|'un, patei lohannes gatawida taikne
ni ainohun ; i}) alUita |)atei qaj) lohannes
bi ))ana, sunya was.

42 Yah galaubidcdun managai du imma

yainar,

*

woklon hyne torfian.

32 Se Ilselend him andswarode and
cwaej), Manega gode weorc ic eow a.'t-
eowde be minum faeder, for hwylcum
dsera weorca wylle ge me hiunan]

33 Da ludeas him andswaredon .and
cwsedon, Ne haene we de for godum
weorce, ac for dinre bysmer-spsece, and
fordam de du eart man, and wyrcst de
to Gode.

34 Se Hselend him andswarode and
cwae]?, Hu nys hit a^^Titen on eowre se,
Da3t ic ssede, Ge synd godas 1

35 Gif he da tealde godas, de Godes
spsec to Wees geworden, and dcet halige
gewrit ne maeg beon aweud,

36 De feeder gehalgode, and sonde on
middan-eard, ge secga|), Da-t dii bysmer
spy est, fordam ic ssede, Ic eom Godes
sunu ?

37 Gif ic ne w}Tce mines fa^dcr weorc,

ne gelyfaj) me

38 Gif ic wyrce mines faeder weorc,
and gif ge me nelhi}? gelyfan, gelyfah
dam weorcum ; diet ge oncnawon and
gelyfon, da^t faider ys on me, and ic on
fedcr.

39 Hig smeadon witodlice ymbe d.Tt
hig woklon hine gcfon, and he code iit
fram him.

40 And he for eft ofer lordanen, to
da're stowe de lohannes wa^s and a:rcst
on fullode, and he ^vunode da?r.

41 And manega comon to him, and
cwaedon, WitodHce ne worlite loliannes
ealle da |)ing de loliannes
nan tacn ;
saede be dyssum, waeron soJjc.

42 And manega gelyfdon on hyne.

Chap. XI.

i Wasuh \tan sums siuks,

Chap. XL ^i Witodlice sum seoc

X. 29-XI. I.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

507

;

outen ende, and ony man sclial not
rauysche hem of myn bond.

29 That thing that my fadir 5af to me,
is more than alle ; therfore no man may
rauysche fro my fadris bond.

30 I and the fadir ben o thing.
31 Jewis token vp stoones, for to stoone

hym to the deeth.

32 Jhesu answeride to hem, I haue
schewid to 50U manye goode werkis of
my fadir, for which werk of hem stoonen
56 me?
33 The Jewis answeriden to him, We
stoonen not thee of good work, but of
blaspbemye, and for thou, sithen thou
art a man, makist thi silf God.

34 Jhesu answeride to hem, TVlier it is
not wi'itun in 3oure lawe, For I seide,
3e ben goddis %

35 If he seide hem goddis, to whiche
the word of God is maad, and the scrip-
ture, which the fadir halwide, and sente
in to the world, may not be vndon,

36 And 5e seyn, for I blaspheme, for I

seide, I am Goddis sone ?

37 If I do not the workis of my fadir,
nyle ^e bileue to me :

38 Sothli if I do, thou3 56 wolen not
bileue to me, bileue ^e to the workis ;
that 3e knowe and bileue, for the fadir
is in me, and I in the fadir.

shall eny man plucke them out off my
honde.

29 My father wich gave them me, is
greatter then all men ; and no man is
able to take them out off my fathers
honde.

30 And I and my father are one.
31 Then the lewes agayne toke vppe

stones, to stone hym with all.

32 Jesus answered them. Many goode
workes have I shewed you from my
father, for which off them wyll ye stone
me?
33 The lewes answered hym, sayinge,
For thy goode workes sake we stone the
not, but for thy blasphemy, and be
cause that thou, beinge a man, makest
thy silfe God.

34 Jesus answered them. Is it not
written in youre lawe, I have sayde, Ye
are goddes ?

35 Yf he called them goddes, vnto
whom the worde of God was spoken,
and the scripture can nott be broken,

36 Saye ye then to hym, whom the
father hath sanctified, and sent into the
worlde. Thou blasphemest, because I
sayd, I am the sonne of God ?
37 Yf I do not the workes off my
father, beleve me not

.

38 Butt .

. though ye beleue not
me, yett beleve the workes ; that ye
maye knowe and beleve, that the father
is in me, and I in hym.

39 Therfore thei sou3ten for to take

him, and he wente out of her hondis.

39 Aga3Tie they went aboute to take
hym, but he escaped out of their hondes.

40 And he wente eftsoone ouer Jordan,
in to that place where John was first
baptisinge, and he dwelte there.

41 And manye camen to him, and
Bciden, Forsoth John dide no signc ;^
forsothe alio thingis what eucre John
seide of this, weren sothe.

42 And many bileueden in to him.

40 And went awaye agayne beyonde
Jordan, into the place where Jhon be-
fore had baptised, and there aboode.

41 And many resorted vnto hym, and
sayd, Jhon did no miracle ; butt all
thynges that Jhon spake of this man,
are true.

42 And there many beloved on hym.

Chap. XI.

i Forsothe ther was sum

Chap. XI.

i A certaync man was

2
1

;

2
1

;

508

GOTHIC, 360.

Lazaius af Bc})anias, us liaimai Maryins
yah Marj)ins, swistrs izos.

2 Wasuli

jjan Marya, sooi

salboda
Frauyan balsana, yali biswarb fotuns
is skufta seinamma, j^izozei broj^ar Laz-
arus siuks was.

3 Insandidcclun {)an })0S swistryus is
du imma, qij^audcins, Frauya, sai ! ])auei
friyos, siuks ist.

4 I[) is gahausyands qaj>, So siukei uist
du dau)>au, ak i'n hauheinais Gu))S, ei
liaubyaidau sunus Gu|)S })airh j>ata.

5 Friyoduh |jau lesus Marjjan, yah

swistar izos, yah Lazaru.

6 Swe hausida, ]>atei siuks was, |>anuh
|>an salida in ])amraei was stada twans
dagans.

7 paj^roh jjan afar J)ata qa]> du sipon-

yam, Gaggam in ludaian aftra.

8 Qe))un du inima jjai siponyos, Ttab-
bei, nu sokidedun })uk afwairpan staiiiam
ludaieis, yah aftra gaggis yaiud ]

9 Andhof lesus, Niu twalif sind wheilos
dagis 1 Yabai wlias gaggij> in dag, ni
gastiggqi]>, unte liuhaj? ])is fairwhaus ga-
saiwhi]>.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

man wa^s, genemned Lazarus of Bcthania,
of ]\Iariau ceastre and of Marthan, his
swustra.

2 Hit waes seo Maria, de smyi-ede
Drihten mid cfaere sealfe, and drigde
his fet mid hyre loccum, Lazarus hyre
brocter wses ge-yfelod.

3 His swustra sendon to him, and
is seoc, se de dii

cwaedon, Drihten, nu !
lufast.

4 Da se Haelend diet gehyrde, da e\vve\)
he to him, Nys deos untruinnys na for
deajjc, ac for Godes wuldre, diet Godes
sunu sig gewuldrod })urh hyne.

5 Sojjlice se Hselend lufode Marthan,
and hyre swustor Marian, and Lazarum
hyra broder.

6 Witodhce he waes twe^en dasras on
dsere sylfan stowe, da he gehyrde, doet
he seoc wnes.

7 ^fter dyssum he cwjr)? to his leorning-
cnihtum, Uton faran eft to ludea lande.
8 His leorning-cnihtas cwsedon to him,
Lareow, nu da ludeas sohton de diet
hig woldon dc ha3nan, and wylt du eft
faran dyder 1

9 Se Hselend him andswarode and
cwa?!?, Hii ne synd twelf tida da's dajges ]
Gif hwa gsej? on dseg, ne set-spyrn}? he,
fordam he gesyh}) dyses middan-eardes
leoht.

TO A))|)an yabai whas gaggij? in naht,

10 Gif he gsc}) on niht, he £et-spyru|j,

gastiggqij?, unte liuhad nist in imma.

fordam de diet leoht nis on hyre.

1

po qa|), yah afar jjata qil>i)' du im,
Lazarus, friyonds unsar, gasaizlep, akci
gaggam ci uswakyau ina.

1

Das ]>\ng he cwse]?, and syddan he
cwajji to him, Lazarus, lire freond, slscp)',
ac ic wylle gan and awreccan hyne of
slecpe.

1

panuh qcjjun jjai siponyos is, Frauya,

1

His leorning-cnihtas cwaedon, Driht-

yabai slepi{), liails wair[)i|).

en, gif he sltTpj), he by)? hal.

13 Qa|)uli }?an Icsus bi daujm is ;

i\>

yainai hugidcdun, jjatei is bi slep qe|)i.

14 panuli |)an qa|j du ini icsus swi-

13 Se Haelend hit cwa*}) be his dea)ie

;

hi wendon s6|)lice, dait he hyt saede be
swefnes slaepe.

14 Da cwa2}> se Haelend openlice to

kun])aba, Lazarus gaswalt

him, Lazarus ys dead ;

15 Yah fagino in izwara, ei galaub-
yai|T, unte ni was yainar ; akei gaggam
du imma.

15 And ic com bli|)e for cowrum l^ing-
um, diet ge gelyfon, fordam ic na^s dara
ac uton gan to him.

t6 panuli qaj)

haitada
Didinuis, {'aim galilaibam scinaim, Gagg-
am yah wcis, ei gaswiltaima mi|) imma.

pomas, saci

T 6 Da cwa*!? Tliomas

to hys
gcferum, Uton gan, and sweltan mid
him.

4
1

3
4
1

;

XL2-I6.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

509

syk man, Lazarus of Bethanye, of the
castel of Mary aud Martha, his sistris.

sicke, named Lazarus of Bethania, the
toune off Mary, and her sister Martha.

2 Forsoth Mary it was, which anoyntide
the Lord with oynement, and wipte his
feet with hir heeris, whos brother Laza-
rus was syk.

3 Therfore his sistris senten to him,
seyinge, Lord, lo ! he whom thou louest,
is syk.

4 Forsoth Jhesu heeringe seide to hem,
This sicknesse is not to the deeth, but
for the glorie of God, that Goddis sone
be glorified bi it.

2 It was that Mary, which annoynted
Jesus with oyntment, and wept his fete
with her heere, whose brother Lazarus
was sicke.
3 And his sister sent vnto hym, say-
inge, Lorde, behold ! he whom thou
lovest, is sicke.

4 When Jesus that herde he sayd. This
infirmite is not vnto deth, but for the
laude of God, that the sonne off God
myght be praysed by the reason of it.

5 Sothli Jhesu louede Martha, and hir

5 Jesus loved Martha, and her sister,

sistir Marye, and Lazarus.

and Lazarus.

6 Therfore as Jhesu herde, for he was
syk, thanne sothli he dwellide in the
same place tweye dayes.

7 Therof aftir thes thingis he seide to

bis disciplis, Go we eft in to Judee.

8 Disciplis seyen to him, Raby,^ now
the Jewis sou3ten for to stoone thee,
and eft thou gost thidur 1

6 After he herde, thatt he was sicke,
then aboode he two dayes still in the
same place where he was.

7 Then after that sayd he to his dis-

ciples, Let vs goo into lewry agayne.

8 His disciples sayde vnto hym. Master,
the lewes lately sought meanes to stone
the, and wilt thou goo thither agayne 1

9 Jhesu answeride, Wher ther ben not
If ony man
twelue ouris of the day?
schal wandre in the day, he hirtith not,
for he seeth the li3t of this world.

9 Jesus answered, Are there not twelve
Yf a man walke
houres in the daye 1
in the daye, he stombleth not, because
he seith the light of this worlde.

10 Sotlili if he schal wandre in the

ny3t, he hirtith, for li5t is not in him.

1

He seith thes thingis, and aftir thes
thingis he seith to hem, Lazarus, oure
frend, slepith, but I go for to reyse him
fro slepe.

10 Yf a man walke in the nyght, he
stombleth, be cause there is no light in
hym.

1

This sayd he, and after that he
sayde vnto them, Oure fi-ende Lazarus
slepeth, but I goo to wake hym outt of
slepe.

12 Tlierfore his disciplis seiden, Lord,

12 Then sayde his disciples, Lorde, iff

if he slepith, he schal be saf.

13 Forsothe Jhesu hadde seid of his
deeth ; but thei gessiden, that he seide
of tiic slepinge of sleep.

Thanne therfore Jhesu seide to hem

1

opynli, Lazarus is deed ;

15 And I enioye for 30U, that 30 be-
leue, for I was not there ; but go we
to liim.

16 Therfore Thomas, that is seid Didy-
mus, seide to euen disciplis, And go we,
that we deye with hini.

he slepe, then shall he do wele ynough.

1

Jesus spake of his dcetli ; but they
thought, that he had spoken of the
natural 1 slepe.

Then sayde Jesus vnto them playnly,

1

Lazarus is deed

15 And I am gladde for youre sakcs,
that I was not there, be cause ye maye
bclcve ; neverthelesse let vs goo vnto
hym.

16 Then sayde Thomas, which is called
Didimus, vnto tlie disciples, Let vs also
goo, that we maye deye with him.

1

9
1

1

;

510

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

17 Qimands })aii lesus, bi^at I'na yu-

J)uii fidwor dagaiis habaudau in lilaiwa.

18 AVasuli Jjan De|)aula newba lairii-
saulwiuiam, swaswe ana spaurdini limf-
tailiunim.
. 19 Yah managai ludaie gaqcmun bi
^Iar|^an yah Maryan, ci gaj)raf3tidedciiia
iyos bi })ana bro|)ar izo.

17 Da for se Hsclend, and gemette 1
diet he wies for|)-faren, and for feower 1
dagum bebyrged.

18 Betliania ys gehende Hienisalem,

ofer fyftyne furlaug.

1

Manega dara ludea comon to ^far-
than and to Marian, daet hig woldon hi
frefrian for hyra Ijrodor ))ingum.

20 1 1? Marjja

sunsei

lesus qimij), wijjraiddya ina ;
in ijarda sat.

hausida, jjatei
ij? Mary a

2

panuh qa|) Mar})a du lesua, Frauya,
ijj wescis her, ni jjau gadau])nodedi bro])-
ar mciiis.

22 Akei yah nu wait, ei Jjiswhah jjei

20 Da Martha geliyrde, da3t se Ha'lend
com, da am heo ongean hyne ; and
Maria sa^t set ham.

Da cwa'j) Martha to dam Hselende,
Drihten, gif dii waere her, nacre min
brodor dead.

2

22 And eac ic wat mi dii, doet God de

bidyis Gu]>, gibij? J)us Guj\

syl}), swa hwaet swa du hyne bitst.

23 Qa}) izai lesus, Usstandij? broJ>ar

23 Da cw3e]> se Use lend to byre, Din

J)eins.

24 Qaj) du imma MarJ?a, "Wait, J?atei
usstaudij) in usstassai in jjamma sped-
istin daga.

25 Qa)> j>an lesus, Ik 'im so usstass yah
libains ; saei galaubeij) du mis, jjauh ga-
ba-daujjni)),^ libaid ;

26 Yah whazuh saei libai}?, yah ga-
Ga-

laubei}) du mis, ni gadau})iii|? aiw.
laul)eis }mta 1

27 Qaj) 'imma, Yai, Frauya, ik galaub-
is Christus, sunus Gu|)S,

ida,
sa in Jjana fairwhu qimanda.

}iatei

j)U

28 Yah j)ata qi})andei, galai}>, yah wop-
idaMaryan, swistar seina, |>iubyo, qij)and-
ei, Laisareis qam, yah haitij) ))uk.

29 Ij> yaiua,

sunsei

hausida, urrais

sprauto, yali I'ddya du imma.

30 Ni))-);au nauh|)amili qam lesus 'in
weihsa, ak was iiauh|)anuh in |>amma
sta(hi, )>arei gamotida imma MarJ)a.

31 luchueis ))an J)ai wisandans mi|) 'izai
in garda, jn-afstyandans lya, gasaiwhand-
ans ^Maryan, |)atei sprauto ussto}>, yah
usiddya, i'lhlyechinuh afar izai, qij)and-
ans, patei gaggij) du hlaiwa, ci grcitai
yainar.

32 1}> Marya, sunsei qam |>arei was
Jesus, gasaiwhaiidei ina draus imma du
fotum, qij'andei du imma, Frauya, V]>

brodor arist.

24 And Martha cwcT]? to him, Ic wat,

dset he arist on dam ytemestan da?ge.

25 And se Haelend cw£e}> to byre, Ic
eom seryst and b'f ; se de gelyfj) on me,
deah he dead sy, he leofaj?

26 And ne swylt nan dara, de leofiijj,

and gelyf|> on me.

Gelyfst du dysesi

27 Heo cwae)) to him, Witodlice, Drilit-
en, ic gelyfe, diet dii eart Crist, Codes
sunu, de on middan-eard come.

28 And da heo das j'ing saede, heo
eode, and clypode, dgollice, Marian, liyre
swustor, dus cwedende, Her is
ure
lareow, and clypa|) de.

29 Da heo daet gehyrde, heo aras rade,

and com to him.

30 Da gyt ne com se Ha'lcnd binnan
da ceastre, ac waes da gyt on da?re
stowe, da>r ^lartlia him ongean com.

3

Da ludcas de wivron mid hyrc on
hiise, and hi frofrodon, da hig gcsawon,
da3t Maria aras, and mid ofeste lit-eodc
hig, fyligdon liyre, dus cwedende, Heo
gccj) to his byrgenc, da^t heo wcpe dara.

32 Da Maria com dar se Haclend wa\s,
and heo liine geseah, heo feoll to liis
fotum, and c\\iv]> to him Drihten, gif

;

XL 17-32.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

511

17 x\nd so Jhesii cam, and fond him

hauynge now foure dayes in the graue.

17 Then went Jesus, and founde that
he had l}Tie in his grave foure dayes
alredy.

18 Sothli Bethanye was bisydis Jeru-

18 Bethani was neye vnto Jerusalem,

salem, as fiftene furlongis.

aboute .xv. furlonges of.

19 Forsothe manye of Jewis earaen to
Marie and Martha, for to comforte hem
of her brother.

20 Therfore as Martha herde, for Jhesu
cam, she renneth to him ; Marie for-
sothe sat at horn.

21 Therfore Martha seide to Jhesu,
Lord, if thou haddist be here, my bro-
ther hadde not be deed.

22 But and now I woot, that what
euere thingis thou schalt axe of God,
God schal 3yue to thee.

23 Jhesus seith to hir, Thi brother

19 And many of the lewes cam to
Martha and Mary, to conforte them over
their brother.

20 Martha as sone as she herde, that
Jesus was commynge, went and met
hym ; Mary sate stille at home.

21 Then sayde Martha vnto Jesus,
Lorde, yff thou haddest bene her, my
brother had not bene deed.

22 But neverthelesse I knowe, that
whatsoever thou axest of God, God will
geve it the.

23 Jesus sayde vnto her, Thy brother

schal ryse a^en.

shall ryse agayne.

24 Martha seith to him, I woot, for he
schal ryse a5en in the a3enrysing in the
laste day.

25 Jhesu seith to hir, I am a^enrisyng
and lyf ; he that bileueth in me, 3he, if
he schal be deed, schal lyue

26 And ech that lyueth, and bileueth
in me, schal not deie \vith outen ende.
Bileuyst thou this tiling'?

27 IShe seith to him, Forsothe,^ Lord,
I haue bileuyd, for thou art Crist, the
sone of quyk God, that bast come in to
this world.

28 And whanne she hadde seide this
thing, she wente, and clepide Marie, hir
sistir, in silence,''' seyinge. The maistir
cometh, and clepith thee.

29 She, as she herde, roos anon, and

I

cam to him.

30 Sothli Jhesu cam not 5it in to the
I castel, but he was 3it in that place, wher
Martha hadde coinen a3ens him.

31 Therfore the Jewis that wercn with
hir in tlie hous, and comfortiden hir,
whanuc thei .si3en Marie, for soonc she
rooH, and wente out, suedon hir, seyinge.
For she goth to the graue, for to wepe
til ere.

32 Forsothe Mario, whanne she hadde
Boyn wher Jhesu was, scyngc him felde
to his feet, and seide to him, Lord, if

24 Martha sayde vnto hym, I knowe
wele, he shall ryse agayne in the resur-
reccion att the last daye.

25 Jesus sayde vnto her, I am the
resurreccion and lyfe ; whosoever be-
leveth on me, ye, though he were deed,
yet shall he lyve ;

26 And whosoever liveth, and beleveth
Belevest thou

on me, shall never deye.
this ?

27 She sayde vnto hym. Ye, Lorde, I
beleve, thatt thou arte Christ, the sonne
off God, which shall come in to the
wo ride.

28 And as sone as she soo had sayde,
she went her waye, and called her sister,
secretly, sayinge. The master is come,
and calleth for the.

29 She, as sone as she herde thatt,

arose quickly, and cam vnto hym.

30 Jesus was not yet come into the
place, where

the

toune, but was in
Martha mctt hym.

31 The lewes then which were with
her iu the liousse, and comforted her,
when they suwe Mary, that she rose
vi)pe hastely, and went out, folowed her,
sayng, She goeth vnto the grave, to
wepe there.

32 Then when Mary was come whej-c
Jesus was, and sawe hym, she fell douno
at his fete, sayinge vnto hym, Lordi', if

;

;

512

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

"vveiseis

her,

ni

jaiih

gaswulti meins

C.d wsere her, nsere min brodor dead.

brojjar.

sunsci

33 paiiuli lesus

gasawli iya
greitandein, yah ludaiuns jjaiei qeniun
inijj izai gi'ctandans, inraulitida ahmiu,
yah inwagida sik silban,
34 Yah qa|>, Whar lagidedun ina] Qe-
))im dn imma, Frauya, hiri yah saiwh.

jjai ludaieis, Sai !

35 Yah tagrida lesus.
36 paruh qejjuii
Avliaiwa frioda "ina.
37 Siimai |)an ize qe|)un, Niu malita
sa, izei uslauk augona )?amma blindin,
gatauyan ei yah sa ui gadau}>uodedi 1

38 panuh lesus aftra inrauhti])S in sis
silbin, gaggi|) du j^amma Idaiwa. Wasuh
pan hulundi, yah staina ufarlagida was
ufaro.

39 Q'^l' lesus, Afnimij) jjana stain. Qa|)
^rai-[)a,

du inmia swist:ir
Frauya, yu fuls ist, iidurdogs auk ist.

dau})ins,

jis

40 Qa]> 'izai lesus, Niu qa]) J)us, ])atei
yabai galaubeis, gasaiwhis wulj)U Gu);s 1

41 Ushofun ]?an j^ana stain j^arei was.
I|) iesus uzuhhof augona iup, yah qaj>,
Atta, awiliudo J>us, unte andhausides
mis

33 Da se Hacleud geseah cliet heo
weop, and daet da ludeas weopon de
mid hyre comon, he geon ro Ic on hys
gaste, and gedrefde hyne s\ Ifno,

34 And cwsc\), Ilwar lede ge hine ?
Hig cwsedon to him, Drihten, ga and
geseoh.

35 And se Haelend weop.
36 And da ludeas cwsedon, Loca nu !

hu he hyne lufode.
37 Sume hi cwaedon, Ne mihte des, de
ontynde bhndes eagan, dou eac dajt des
naere dead 1

38 Eft se Heelend geomrode on liim
sylfum, and com to da-re byrgene.
Hit
wses Jin scrnef, and dar wa^s an stan on-
uppan geled.

39 And se Haelend cw.t|), Do}) aweg
Da cwi^\> ]\Iartha to hiin,
done stan.
da3s swustor de dar dead wscs, Drihten,
mi he stincj), he wses for feower dagum
4ead.

40 Se Hselend cwsej) to hyre, Hil ne
ssede ic de, dret du gesyhst Godes wuldor,
gif du gelyfst 1

41 Da dydon hig aweg done stan.

.

.

.

.

. Se Haelend ahof his eagan up, and
cwa3)), Fajder, ic do jjancas de, fordam
du gehyrdest me

42 Yah ]5an ik wissa, jmtei sinteino
mis andhauscis, akci in manageins })iz()s
bistandandeins, qa}>, ei galaubyaina, J^atei
\)U mik "insandides.

43 Yali jnita qi)>;uids, stibnai mikilai

hropida, Lazaru, hiri ut.

42 Ic wat, dipt du me symlc gchyrst, ac
ic cwa?j), for dam folce de her ymbiitau
stent, diet hi gclyfon, divt dii me ascnd-
est.

43 Da he das j'ing Sccdc, he clypode

mycelre stefne, Lazarus, ga lit.

44 Yah urrann sa dau]ia, gabundans

lianduns yah fotuns faskyani,
.... yah wlits is auralya bibinuhins.
Qa|) du ini lesus, Andbindij) ina, yah
Ictij) gaggau.

44 And s5na stop for|>, se de dead

woes, gebiinden haiidum and fdtum, .
.... and hys neb wtes mid swat-line
gebiindon.
to
him, Unbindaj) bine, and la^ta|> gan.

Da cwa^j)

se Hrclend

.

.

45 panuh managai j'ize Yuchiiei

]m\
qimandans at Maryin, yah saiwhandans
|)atei gatawida, galaubidcdun imma.

45 Manega dara ludea de comon to
Marian, and gesawon da |)iug de he
dyde, gelyfdon on bine.

46 Sumai)j-|)an 'ize galij'un du Farci-

46 Hi sume foron to dam Phariscon,

;

a. 33-46.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

513

liou liaddist be here, ray brother hadde
lot be deed.
33 Therfore as Jhesu si3 hir wepynge,
md the Jewis that weren with hir wep-
nge, he made noyse in
spirit, and
rroublide him silf,
3 4 And seide, Wher han ^e putt him '?
rhei seyen to him, Lord, come and se.

35 And Jhesu wepte.
36 Therfore the Jewis seiden, Lo ! hou
le louede him.
37 Forsothe summe of hem seiden,
^Vher this man that openyd the y3en of
;he born blynde, mi3te not make that
md this deiede not ?
38 Therfore Jhesu eft makynge noyse
n him silf, cam to the graue.
For-
jothe ther was a denne, and a stoon was
jut theron.
39 Jhesu seith, Take ^e a wey the
Martha, the sistir of him that
jtoon.
was deed, seith to him. Lord, he stynk-
ith now, sothli he is of foure dayes.

40 Jhesus seith to hir, Wher I haue
aot seid to thee, for if thou schalt bi-
leue, thou schalt se the glorie of God %
41 Therfore thei tooken a wey the
Forsothe the y3en reysid
5toon
v^pward, Jhesu seide, Fadir, I do thank-
yngis to thee, for thou herdist me ;

me, but

for thou euere
i 42 Forsoth I wiste,
the peple that
for
leerest
itondith aboute, I seide, that thei bileue,
for thou hast sent me.
43 Whanne he hadde seid thes thingis,
16 criede with greet vois, Lazarus, come
ihou out.
44 And anoon he that was deed, cam
Forth, bounden the hondis and feet with
bondis, .... and his face was boundun
Jhesu seith to hem,
«nth a sudarie.^
Vnbynde 36 hira, and suffre 30 go awey.

45 Tlierfore manye of the Jewis that
3amcn to Marie and Martha, and Hy3cn
irhat thingihj he dlde, bileuedcn in to
bim.
46 Sothli summe of hem wcntcn to

thou haddest bene here, my brother had
not bene deed.

33 When Jesus sawe her wepe, and
the leAves also wepe whych cam with
her, he groned in his spret, and vexed
hym silfe,

34 And sayde. Where have ye layed
hyml They sayde vnto hym, Lorde,
come and se.

35 And Jesus wept.
36 Then sayde the lewes, Beholde !

howe he loved hym.

37 Some off them sayde, Coulde not he
which openned the eyes of the blynde,
have made also that this man shulde
not have deyed %

38 Jesus agayne gronynge in hym silfe,
It was a cave, and

cam to the grave.
a stone layde on it.

39 Jesus sayd. Take ye awaye the stone.
Martha, the sister of hym that was deed,
sayde vnto him, Lorde, by this tyme he
stenketh, for he had bene deed foure
dayes.

40 Jesus sayde vnto her, Sayde I not
vnto the, that if thou diddest beleve,
thou shuldest se the glory of God 1

41 Then they toke awaye the stone
from the place where the deed was layde.
eyes, and sayd,
Jesus lifte vppe his
Father, I geve the thankes, be cause
that thou hast herde me

42 I knewe wele, that thou hearest me
all wayes, but because of the people that
stonde by, I sayde it, that they myght
beleve, that thou hast sent me.

43 And when he thus had spoken, he
cryed with a loud voyce, Lazarus, come
forthe.

44 And he that was deed, cam forth,
bounde hand and fote with bondes, after
the manner as they were wonte to byndo
their deed with all, and his face was
Jesus sayde
bounde with a na})kyn.
vnto them, Loose hym, and lett hym
goo.

45 Then many of the Jcwes which cam
to Mary, and hud sene the thynges which
Jesus did, bclevcd on hym.

46 But some off them went their waycs

L I

514

GOTHIC, 360.

eaium, yali qe])un du im, ))atci gatawlda
lesiis.

47 Galesun ])an jai auhumistans gud-
yaiis yah jnai Farci ....

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

and SDcdon him, da j)ing de se Hsclend

dyde."*"

47 Witodlice da bisceopas and da
Pharisei gaderodon gemot, and cwsedon,
Hwset do we? fordum des man wyrcj)
mycele tacna.

48 Gif we hine forlettaj^, ealle ge1yfa|>
on hine ; and Romane cuma)>, and nima})
ure land and urne ))eodscipe.

49 Plyra an woes genemned Caiphas,
se wses da on geare bisceop, and cwa?])
to him, Ge nyton nanj>ing,

50 Ne ne ge|>encea|?, dset us ys betere,
doet an man swelte for folce, and eall
}>eod ne forwurde.

51 Ne cwse)) he d?et of him sylfum, ac
da he wses daet gear bisceop, he witcgode,
dast se Hselend sceolde sweltan for da^re

jjeode,

52 And na syuderlice for da^re ])eode,
ac doet he wolde gesomnian togo^dere
Godes beam de todrifene wseron.

53 Of dam d?ege hig |)ohton dat hi
woldon hyne ofslean.

54 Da ne for se Hselend na opcnlice
gemang dam ludeum ; ac for on da^t
land wid dat westen, on da burh, de
ys genemned Effi*em, and wunode dar
mid his leoniing-cnihtura.

55 ludea castron wseron gehende, and
manega foron of dam lande to Hieru-
salem ser dam eastron, dat hig woldon
hig sylfe geliHlgian.

56 Hig s5hton done Halend, and
sprsecon him bet^vynan, dar hig stodon
on dam temple, and dus cwadon, Hwa^t
wene ge, dat he ne cume to frcols-
dage 1
57 Da bisceopas
Pharisei
liafdon beboden, gif hwa wistc hwar
he waere, dat he hyt cyddc, dat hig
mihton hine niman.

and

da

Chap. XII.

i

^in Be))nni*yin,

Chap. XII.

^i Se Hselend com 8}Tt
dagum ser dam eastron to Bethania,

XL47.-XII. I.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

515

Pharisees, and seiden to hem, what
thingis he dide.

47 Therfore the bischops and Pharisees
gedriden a counceil a5ens Jhesu, and
seiden, What don we'? for this man
doth many signes."*"

48 If we leeue him thus, alle men
schulen bileue in to him ; and Romayns
schulen come, and sclmlen take oure
place and flok.

49 Forsoth oon of hem, Cayfas by
name, whanne he was bischop of that
3eer, seide to hem, ^e witen no thing,

50 Nethir thenken, for it spedith to
man deie for the pepie, and

50U, that
that alle folk perische not.

51 Forsoth he seide not this thing of
him silf, but whanne he was bischop of
that 5eer, he prophesiede, for Jhesu was
to deyinge for the folk,

52 And not oonly for the folk, but
that he schulde gedere in to oon the
sones of God that weren scaterid.

53 Therfore fro that day thei thou5ten

for to sle him.

54 Therfore Jhesu walkide not now
opynli at the Jewis ; but he wente in to
a cuntree bisydis the desert, in to a
citee, that is seid Effrem, and there he
dwelte with his disciplis.

55 Forsothe the pask of Jewis was
next, and many of the cuntree sti3eden
vp to Jerusalem the day bifore pask, for
to halowe hem selue.

56 Therfore thei sou3ten Jhesu, and
Bpaken to gidere, stondinge in the tem-
ple, What gessen ^e, for he cometh not
to the feeste day ?

to the Pharises, and tolde them, what
Jesus had done.

47 Then gadered the hye prestes and
Pharises a counsel!, and sayde. What do
we 1 this man doeth many miracles.

48 Yf we lett hym scape thus, all men
will beleve on hym ; and the Romaynes
shall come, and take awaye oure countre
and people.

49 And won of them, named Cayphas,
which was the hye prest that same yeare,
sayde vnto them, Ye perceave nothynge
att all,

50 Nor yett consider, that it is expe-
dient for vs, that won man deye for the
people, and nott that all the people
perisshe.

51 This spake he nott of hym silfe,
butt beynge hye preste that same yeare,
prophesied he, that Jesus shulde deye
for the people,

52 And not for the people only, but
tliat he shulde gadder to gedder in won
the children of God which were scattered
abroode.
53 From that day kept they a counsell
togedder for to put hym to deeth.

54 Jesus therfore walked no more
openly amonge the lewes ; butt went his
waye thence vnto a countre ny to a
wildernes, into a cite, called EfFraym,
and there haunted with his disciples.

55 The lewes ester was neye att bond,
and many went out of the countre vppe
to Jerusalem before the ester, to purify
them selves.

56 Then sought they for Jesus, and
spake bitwene them selves, as they stode
in the temple, What thynkc ye, seynge
he commeth not to the feast 1

57 Forsotlic the bischopisand Pharisees
hadden 50UU11 a maundement, that if ony
man knew wlicr he is, he schewe, that
thei taken hym.

57 The hye prestes and Pharises liad
geven a comniaundment, that yf eny
man knew where he were, he shulde
shewe it, that they myght take hym.

Chap. XT I.

i Tlicrfore Jlicsu bifore
iixc dayes of j)a3k cam to 13ethanye,

Chap. XIT. i Then Jesus before sixe
dayes of ester cam to Bethany, where

L 1 2

1

!

5
2
1

516

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

jjarei was Lazarus sa clau|)a, j^auei ur-
raisida us clau|)aim lesus.

2 paruh gawauihteduii iinma nalitamat,
'i\> Lazar-
yaiuar yah Marl)a audbahtida ;
us was SUUI8 ]?ize anakumbyaudane mi])
imnia.

3 i \> Marya nam pund balsanis nardaus
filugalaubis, yah gasalboda
pistikeinis
fotuus iesua, yah biswarb fotuns is
\]> sa gards fulls war])
skufta seiiiamma ;
daunais ])izos salbonais.

4 Qa|) })an ains |)ize siponye is, Yudas
Seimonis, sa Iskariotes, izei skaftida sik
du galewyan ina,

5 Duwhe l^ata balsan ni frabauht was
in .t. skatte, yah fradaili]> wesi jjarbam 1

6 patu))-|?an qa]>, ni )?eei ina |)ize jjarb-
ane kara wesi, ak unte |)iubs was, yah
arka habaida yah J)ata iunwaurpano bar.

7 Qaj) l^an lesus, Let lya, in dag ga-

filhis meinis fastaida jjata ;

8 1]> }:ans unledans sinteino habai]? mi})

izvvis, i]) mik ni sinteino habaij).

dar Lazarus woes dead, de se Hseleud
awrehte.

2 Hig worliton him daer gebeorscipe,
and Martha jjenode ; Lazarus wa^s an
dicra de mid him saet.

3 Maria nam an pund deorwyrjjre
sealfe mid dam wyrt-gemauge de hig
nardus hata|>, and srayrede da^s Hael-
endes fet, and drigde mid hyre loccum ;
and daet hus waes gefylled of daere sealfe
swcecce.

4 Da cwsej) an his leorning-cnihta,
de hine be-

ludas Scariod,
laewde,

5 Hwi ne sealde heo das sealfe wid
]>vym hundred penegum, daet man mihte
syllan jjearfum 1

6 Ne cwae}) he na daet, fordig de him
gebyrode to dam |)earfum, ac fordam de
he waes })e6f, and ha^fde serin and baer
da l^ing de man sende.

7 Da cwa?j) se Haelend, Lset hig, daet
heo healde da of done daeg de man me
bebyrige ;

8 Ge habbaj) symle |)earfan mid eow,

ac ge nabba]) me symle.

9 Fanjj j)an manageins filu ludaie, j)atei
lesus yainar ist ; yah qemun, ni in les-
ainis, ak ei yah Lazaru sewheina,

11 is

jjanci urraisida us dauj'aim.

TO !Munaidcdunu})-|>an auk ])ai auhum-
istans gudyans ei yah Lazarau usqem-
eina,

1

Unte managai in })is garunnun lu-

daiei, yah galauljideduu lesua.

12 Iftumin daga manageins filu, sei

qam at
qiniij) lesus in lairausaulwniai,

duijjai, gahausyandans

jjatei

9 Micel maenigeo dara ludea gecneow,
daet he waes daer ; and hig comon, naes
na for daes Haelendcs |>ingon synderlice,
ac daet hig woldon geseon Lazarum, de
he awehte of dea})e.

10 Dara sacerda ealdras )?ohton dset

hig woldon Lazarum ofslean,

1

Fordam de manega foron fram dam
ludeum for his })ingon, and gclyfdon on
done Haelend.

1

On morgcn mycel maenigeo, de com
to dam freols-da^gc, da hig gchyrdon
da^t se Haelend com to Hicrusalem,

I 3 Nomun astans peikabagnic, yah ur-
ruunun wijjragamotyan Vmma, yah hrop-
idodun, Osanna, ))iu}>ida sa qimauda in
uamin Frauyius, j)iudans Israelis.

13 Hi namon palm-treowa tw'gu, and
eodon lit ongean hine, and clypodon,
Si Israhela cing hal and gebletsod, de
com on Drihtnes naman.

14 Bigat |)an lesus asilu, gasat ana

iTui, swaswe ist gamelij>,

14 And se Hselend gemette anne assan,
and rad on-uppan dam, swa hit awriten

15 Ni ogs J)us, dauhtar Sion ; sai

Nc ondraid dii, Siones dohter ; nu !

1

1

;

2
1

;

XII. 2-15.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

wher Lazarus was deed, whom Jhesu
reyside.

2 Forsoth tliei maden to him a sopere
there, and Martha myni stride to hym ;
Lazarus forsothe was oon of men sit-
tinge at the mete with him.

3 Therfore Marie took a pound of
oynement spikenard,^ precious, and an-
oyntide the feet of eJhesu, and wipte his
feete with her heeris ; and the hous is
filhd of the sauour of oygnement.

4 Therfore Judas Scarioth, .... oon
of his disciplis, that was to bitraynge
hym, seide,

5 AYhi this oygnement is not seeld for
thre hundrid pens, and is ^ouun to nedy
men 1

6 Forsoth he seide this thing, not for
it perte}Tiede to him of nedy men, but
for he was a theef, and he hauynge
pursis baar tho thingis that weren sent.
7 Therfore Jhesu seide, Suffre 5e hir,
that in to the day of my birying sche
kepe that

8 Forsothe 36 schulen euer haue pore
men with 30U, sothli ^e schulen not
euere haue me.

9 Thei-fore myche cumpany of the
Jewis knewe, that Jhesu was there ;
and tliei camen, not oonly for Jhesu,
but for to se Lazarus, whom he reysede
fro deede men.

10 Forsothe the princes

of prestis

thou3ten for to sle Lazarus,

1

For manye of the Jewis for hym

wente awei, and beleueden in to Jhesu.

12 Forsothe on the morwe a myclie
cumpany, that cam to gidere at the
feeste day, whanne thei hadden herd,
for Jhesu cometli to Jerusalem,

13 Tooken brauncliis of palmes, and
camen forth a3ens him, and crieden, O-
Banna, blcssid is he, that comcth in the
name of the Lord, king of Israel.

14 And Jhesu fond a litil assc, and sat

on him, as it is writun,

TYNDALE, 1526.

517

Lazarus which was deed was, whom
Jesus raysed from deeth.

2 There they made him a supper, and
Martha served ; butt Lazarus was won
of them that sate at the table with hym.

3 Then toke Mary a pounde ofF oynt-
ment called nardus, perfecte and pre-
cious, and anoynted Jesus fete, and
wept his fete with her heer ; and all
the housse smelled off the savre off the
oyntment.

4 Then sayde won of his disciples,
named Judas Iscariot, Simons sonne,
which after warde betrayed hym,
5 Why was not this oyntment solde
for thre hondrede pence, and geven to
the povre 1

6 This sayde he, not that he cared for
the pover, butt be cause he was a thefe,
and kept the bagge and bare that which
was geven.

7 Then sayde Jesus, Lett her alone,
agaynst the daye off my buryinge she
kept it

8 The povre all wayes shall ye have
with you, butt me shall ye nott all
wayes have.

9 Moche people off the lewes had know-
ledge, that he was there ; and they cam,
nott for Jesus sake only, butt that they
myght se Lazarus also, whom he raysed
from deeth.

10 The hye prestes held a counsell that

they myght put Lazarus to deeth also,

1

Be cause that for his sake many of
the lewes went awaye, and beleved on
Jesus.

1

On the morowe moche people, which
cam to the feast, when they herde that
Jesus shulde come to Jerusalem,

13 Toke braunchcs off palme trees, and
went and mctt hym, and crycd, Ho-
sianna, blessed is he, that in the name
of the Lordc commeth, kynge of Isra-
hell.

14 Jesus gott a yongc assc, and sate
that wich was

th(!ron, HConlyngc to
written,

15 The dou-tir of Syon, nylc thftu

15 Fcarc nott, douglitcr of Sion ; be-

;

7

518

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

|)Iudans peiiis qimi]', sitands ana fulin

asilaiis.

16 patu|)-])an ni kun))eclun sipon}^os is
frumist, ak bi}'e gasweraips was lesus,
})ata was du
l^anuh gamundeduii, j'atei
]?amma gamelij), yah piitu gatawideduu
'iinma.

din cing cym|>, uppan assan folan sitt-
ende.

16 Ne undergeton hys leorning-cnihtas
das )jing serest, ac da se Hselend waes
gewuldrod, da gemundon hig, diet das
jnng waeron awritene be him, and das
])ing hig dydon him.

17 AYeitwodida |)an so managci, sei was
mijj imma, )>aii Lazaru wopida us hlaiwa,
yah urraisida ina us daujjaim.

18 Du|>})e iddyedun gamotyan 'imma
managei, unte hausidedun ei gatawidedi
]>o taikn.

19 panuh jjai Fareisaieis qe]>un du sis

misso, Saiwhij?, Jjatei ni botei[) waiht
sai ! so manaseds afar imma galai]?.

20 Wesunu]?-|>an sumai jjiudo, }?ize ur-

rinnaudane ei inwiteina in J)izai dulj^ai.

21 pai atiddyedun du Filippau, |>amma
fram Be]?saeida Galeilaie, yah bedun ina,
qi))andans, Frauya, wileima lesu gasai-
whan.

22 Gaggij) Filippus, yah qi}>i}> du An-
draiin ; yali aftra Andraias yah Filippus
qe])un du lesua.

2*3 lj> lesus andhof im, qijands, Qam

wheila, ei sweraidau sunus mans.

24 Amen, amen, qijja

nibai
kaurno whaiteis gadriusando in air]?a
gaswilti}), silbo ainata allifni}) ;
i]) yabai
gaswiltij), manag akran bairij>.

izwis,

25 Saci fiiyo]) saiwala scina, fraqistci))
Vzai ; yah saei fiaij) saiwala seina in
|)amma fairwhau, in libaiuai aiweinon
bairgij) izai.

26 Yabai mis whas audbahtyai, mik
laistyai ; yah jnirei im ik, ]?aruh sa and-
Yah yabai
bahts meins wisan habai}).
whas mis andbahtei]>, swcraij) ina atta.

1

Seo ma}nigeo de waes mid him, da
he Lazarum clypode of djere byrgene,
and hine awchte of dea|ie, cydde ge-
witnesse.

18 And fordi him com seo maenigeo
ongean, fordam de hi gehyrdon daet he
worhte diet tacn.

19 Da Pharisei cwsedon betwux him
sylfum, We geseojj, daet we nan)iing ne
fremiaj) ; nu ! wyle eall middan-eaid
sefter him.

20 Sume de wa?ron hsedene, de foron
dset hig woldon hi gebiddan on dam
freols-d?ege.

21 Da genealcehton to Philippe, se wfes
of dsere Galileiscan Bethsaida, and hi
Leof, we
bsedon hine, and cwscdon,
wyllaj> geseon done Hselend.

22 Da code Philippus, and Fscde hit
Andrejc ; and eft Andreas and Philippus
hit siCdon dam Hselende.

23 Se Ha?lend him andswarodc, and
cwne]?, Seo tid cym]?, dset raannes suiiu
by]) geswutelod."*"
'24 S6})lice, ic secge eow, daet hwactene
biiton hyt fealle on
corn wunaj) ana,
eorjian and sy dead ; gif hit byj> dead,
hit bring)) mycelne Wivstm.

25 Se de lufaj) his sawle, forspil}) hig ;
and se de hataj) his sawle on disum
middan-earde, gehylt hi on ecum life.

26 Gif hwa l^enige me, fylige me ; and
Gif me

min j)en h\\) d»r, deer ic com.
hwa ];ena]), min fiedcr hine wur|>a|i.

27 Xu saiwala mcina gadrobnoda, yah
wha tjijiau 1
Atta, nasci mik us juzai
wheilai ; akei dujjjjc qam in jiizai wheilai;

27 Nu min sawl ys gedrcfed, and hw.Tt
Feeder, gehsel me of dissc

secge ic 1
tide ; ac for dam ic com on das tid ;

28 Atta, hauhei namo )jcinata. Qam
]'an stibna us himina, Yah hauhida, yah

28 Fa^'der, gewuldra dmne naman. Da
com stefn of heofone, dus cwcden^e,

1

;

9

XII. 16-28.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

519

drede ; lo ! tin king cometh, sittinge on
the colt of a sclie asse.

16 His disciplis knewen not first thes
thingis, but wlianne Jhesu is glorified,
thanne thei recordiden,^ for thes thingis
weren writen of him, and thes thingis
thei diden to him.

17 Therfore the cumpany baar wit-
nessing, that was with him, whanne he
graue, and
clepide Lazarus fro
reyside him fro deede men.

the

18 Therfore and the cumpany cam
metinge to him, for thei herden him
to haue don this signe.

19 Therfore the Pharisees seiden to
hem selue, ^e seen, for we profiten no
thing j lo ! al the world wente aftir him.

20 Forsothe ther weren summe hethen
men, of hem that hadden sty5ed vp for
to worschipe in the feeste day.

2

Therfore thes camen to Philip, that
was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and preieden
him, seyinge, Sire, we wolen se Jhesu.

holde ! thy kynge commeth, sittynge on
an asses coolte.

16 These thynges vnderstode not his
disciples at the fyrst, but when Jesus
was gloryfied, then remembryd they,
that soche thynges were written of hym,
and that soche thynges 'they had done
vnto hym.

17 The people that was with hym,
when he called Lazarus out off his grave,
and raysed hym from deeth, bare re-
cord e.

18 Therfore met hym the peple, be
cause they herde that he had done soche
a myracle.

1

The Pharises therfore sayde amonge
them selves. Ye se, that we prevayle no
thynge ; loo ! all the worlde goth after
hym.

20 There were certayne grekes, amonge

them which cam to praye at the feast.

21 The same cam to Philip, which was
of Bethsayda a cite in Galile, and de-
sired hym, sayinge, Syr, we wolde fayne
se Jesus.

22 Philip cometh, and seith to Andrew;

2 2 Philip cam, and tolde Andrew ; and

eft Andrew and Philip seiden to Jhesu.

agayne Andrew and Philip tolde Jesus.

23 Sothli Jhesu answeride to hem, sey-
inge. The our cometh, that mannis sone
be clarified.

24 Treuli, treuli, I seie to 50U, no but
a corn of whete fallinge in to the erthe
schal be deed, it dwellith aloone ; sothli
if it schal be deed, it bringith moche
fruyt.

25 He that louetli his soule,^ schal
leese it; and he that hatith his soule^
in this world, kepith it in to euere-
lasting lyf.

26 If ony man seruith to me, sue he
me ; and where I am, there and my
If ony man schal
mynystre^ schal be.
mynistre to me, my fadir schal worschipe
him.

27 Now my soule is troublid, and what
Fadir, saue me fro this
Bchal I seye 1
our ; but for that thing I cam in to this
our

28 Fadir, clarifie thi name.

Therfore
a vols cam fro hcucuc, scyiiigc, And I

23 And Jesus answered them, sayinge,
The houre is come, that the sonne of
man must be glorified.

24 Verely, verely, I saye vnto you,
except the wheate come fall into the
grounde and deye, it bydeth alone ; yf
it deye, it brengeth forth moche frute.

25 He that loveth his life, shall de-
stroye it ; and he that hatetli his lyfe
in this worlde, shall kepe it vnto lyfe
eternall.

26 Yf eny man mynister vnto me, lett
hym folowe me ; and where I am, there
shall also my minister be. And if eny
man minister vnto me, hym will my
father honourc.
27 Nowc is my soule troubled, and
Father, delyvrc me
what shall I sayo )
from this houre ; but therfore cam I
vnto this houre ;

28 Fatlier, glorify thy name.

Then
cam tlicrc a voycc from hcveu, T have

;

;

520

GOTHIC, 360.

aftra hauhya.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

And ic gewuldrode, and eft ic gewul-
drige.

29 Managei ]?an sei sto]?, galiausyandei,
qe})uii, jjeiwlion wairjjaii ; sumaih qe|)un,
aggilus du inima rodida.

29 Seo msenigeo de dser stod, and dset
gehyrde, saedon, daet hyt jjunrode ; sume
ssedon, claet engel spsece wid hyne.

30 Andhof ifesus, yali qa)), Ni in raeina

so stibna war]?, ak in Vzwara.

31 N"u staua 1st ])izai manasedai, nu sa

reiks ))is fairwhaus uswairpada ut.

30 Se Hselcnd, him andswarode, and
cwa3}), Ne com deos stefen for minum
)?ingum, ac for eowrum J?ingum.

31 Nii ys middan-eardes dom, nu by|>
dyses middan-eardes ealdor lit-aworpen.

32 Yah Vk yabai ushauhyada af air|>ai,

alia at])insa du mis.

32 And gif

ic beo up-iJhafen fram

eor])an, ic teo ealle })ing to me sylfum.

33 patu|)-|)an qaj), bandwyands whileik-

amma dau[;au skulda gadaujjuan.

34 Andhof imma so managei, Weis
hausidedum ana witoda, jjatei Christus
siyai du aiwa ; yah whaiwa ]>u
qi])is,
skulds i'st ushauhyan sa suuus
patei
mans 1

Wlias i'st sa sunus mans 1

33 Dset he saede, and tacnode hwylcum

dea]>e he wolde sweltan.

34 Seo maiuigeo him andswaro<le and
cw£e)>, We gehyrdon on dicre se, da^t
Crist bi|) on ecnysse ; and humeta segest
du, Hit gebyraj) da^t mannes sunn beo
up-ahafen 1 Hwset ys des mannes sunn ?

35 Q^'^l' l'^^ ^^ i"^ lesus, Nauh leitil
mel liuha)) "in 'izwis ist ; gaggi}), })ande
liuha]) habai}), ei riqiz 'izwis ni gafahai
yah saei gaggi)) in riqiza, ni wait whaj)

36 pande liuhajj habai)?, galaubeij? du
ei sunyus liuhadis wairj?ai]?.
liuhada,
pata rodida lesus, yah galaij?, yah ga-
falli sik faura im.

37 Swa filu 'imma taikne gatauyandin
'in andwairjjya "ize, ni galaubidedun im-
ma ;

38 Ei j?ata waurd Esaei'ins, praufetaus,
qa|?, Frauya, whas
usfullnodedi,
galaubida hauseinai nnsarai, yah arms
Frauyins whamma andhuli|?s war}) 1

J)atei

35 Da cwre]? se Hselend, Nu g}"t ys
lytel leoht on eow ;
ga|i, da hwile de ge
leoht habbon, da3t |)ystro eow ne befon ;
se de gsej) on jjystrum, he nat hwyder
he gsej'.

36 Da hwile de ge leoht habbon, ge-
lyfaj) on leoht, daet ge syn leohtes beam.
Das |>ing se Hselend him saede, and
code, and bediglode hine fram him.
37 Da he swa mycele tacn dyde be-
foran him, hi ne gelyfdon on hyne

38 Diet d?es witegan word, Isaias, waere
gefylled, de he cwa^|>, Driliten, hwa ge-
lyfde da^s de we gehyrdon, and hwam
waes Drihtnes strenej) geswutelod ?

39 Du|)))e ni mahtedun galaubyan, untc

39 Fordi hi ne mihton gelyfan, fordam

aftra qa|) Esacias,

40 Gablindida ize augona, yah gadaub-
ni gaumidcdcina
yali ga-

ida ize hairtona, ei
uugain, yah froj'cina hairtin ;
wandidedeina, yah ganasidcdyau ins.

Isaias cwa^}> eft,

40 He liblende hyra eagan, and <iliyrde
hyra heortan, da^t hi ne gcseon mid
hyra eagon, and mid hyra heortan ne
ongyton ; and syn gecyrrede, and ic hig
gehaele.

41 pata qaj) Esacias, jjan sawh wul[)U

41 Isaias sscdc das jjing, d;i he geseah

'is, yah rodida bi in a.

42 panuh )mn swo)'auh yah us |'ai*m
rcikam manap^ai galaubidedun du imma,
akci faura Farcisaium ni andhaihaitun,

hys wuldor, and spriec be him.

42 And deah manega of dam caldron
gelyfdon on hyne, ac hi hit ne cyddon
for da^a Pharisea )?ingum, de-ljes hig

1

KII. 29-42.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

521

laue clarified, and eft I sehal clarifie.

glorified it, and will glorify it agayne.

29 Therfore the cumpany tliat stood,
ind herde, seide, tliundir to be maad ;
Dthere men seiden, an aungel spak to
lim.
30 Jhesu answeride, and seide, This
i^ois cam not for me, but for 50U.

Now is dom of the world, now the

3
orince of this world schal be cast out.

32 And if I schal be enhaunsid fro the
3rthe, I schal drawe alle thiugis to my

5ilf.

33 Sothli he seide this thing, signifi-
ynge bi what deeth he was to deiynge.
34 The cumpany answeride to him,
We han herd of the lawe, for Crist
ilwellith in to with outen ende ; and
hou seist thou. It bihoueth mannis sone
for to be arerid? Who is this mannis
sone ?
35 Therfore Jhesu seith to hem, 5it a
litil li3t is in 50U ; walke 5e, the while
je han li3t, that derknessis catche not
50U ; and he that wandrith in derknessis,
woot nere whidur he goth.

36 The while ^e han li3t, byleue ^e in
to li3t, that 3e be the sones of li3t.
Jhesu spak thes thingis, and wente,
and hidde him fro hem.
37 Sothli whanne hehadde don somanye
signes^ byfore hem, thei bileueden not
in to him ;

38 That the word of Ysaie, the pro-
phete, schulde be fillid, which he seide,
Lord, who bileuede to oure heering,
and to whom is the arm of the Lord
schcwid ]

29 Then sayde the people that stode
by, and herde, it thoundreth ; other
sayde, an angell spake to hym.

30 Jesus answered, and sayde, This
voyce cam nott be cause of me, but
for youre sakes.

31 Nowe is the iudgement of this
worlde, nowe shall the prynce off this
worlde be cast out a dores.

32 And I yf I were lifte vppe from

the erthe, will drawe all men vnto me.

33 This sayde Jesus, signifyinge what

deeth he shulde deye.
34 The people answered hym. We have
herde of the lawe, that Christ bydeth
ever ; and howe sayest thou then, That
the Sonne of man must be lifte vppe 1
Who is that sonne of man ?

35 Jesus sayde vnto them. Yet a lytell
whyle is the light with you ; walke,
whill ye have lightt, lest the darcknes
come on you ; he that walketh in the
darke, wotteth not whither he goeth.

36 Whyll ye have light, beleve on the
light, that ye maye be the children of
These thynges spake Jesus, and
light.
departed, and hid hym silfe from them.
37 And though he hade done soo many
myracles before them, yet beleved not
they on hym ;

38 That the sayinge of Esayas, the
prophet, myght be fulfilled, that
he
spake, Lorde, who shall beleve oure say-
inge, and to whom ys the arme off the
Lorde declared?

39 Therfore thei my3ten not bileue,

39 Therfore coulde they not beleve, be

for eft Ysaye seide,

40 He hath blyndid her y3en, and he
hath endurid^ the herte of hem, that
thei sc not with y3en, and vndirstonde
not with herte ; and that thei be con-
ucrtid,^ and I hcele hem.

41 Ysaie seid thes thingis, whanne he
8y3 tlie gloric of hym, and Hpak of him.
42 Nethelcs and of the princes manye
bileueden in to him, ])ut for the Furisccs
thei knowlcchidcn not, that thei schuld-

cause that Esaias sayth agayne,

40 He hath blinded their eyes, and
hardened their hertes, that they shuld
not se with their eyes, and vnderstonde
with their hertes ; and shulde be con-
verted, and I shulde heale them.

41 Soche thynges sayde Esaias, when
he sawe hys glory, and spake of him.

42 Neverthelesso amonge the

chcfo
rulers many ])clcved on hym, but be-
cause of the Pharises they wolde not bo

;

;

522

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

ci us swnagogein ni uswaurpanai waur])-
ciua

man ut-adrife of hyra gesomnunge ;

43 Friyodedun auk mais liauliein man-

43 Hi lufodon manna wuldor, swidor

niska, j>au hauheiii Gu|)S.

donne Godes wuldor.

44 I|) ifesus hropida, yah qaj?, Saei ga-
laubeij) du mis, ni galaubeij? du mis, ak
du jjainma saudyandin mik.

45 Yah saei saiwhij? mik, saiwhij) jjana

sandy an dan mik.

46 Ik liuhad 'in ]>amma fairwhau qam,
ei whazuh saei galaubyai du mis, in
riqiza ni wisai.

47 Yah yabai whas meinaim hausyai
waurdam, yah galaubyai, ik ni stoya
ina ; nih ]?an qam, ei stoyau manased,
ak ei ganasyau manased.

44 Se Haelend clypode, and cwse|? to
him, Se de gelyf)) on me, ne gelyf^ he
na on me, ac on done de me sende.

45 And se de me gesyh}?, gesyhj? done
do me sende.

46 Ic com to leohte on middan-eard,
and nan dara de gelyfj) on me, ne wuua|>
on ])ystrum.
47 And gif hwa gehyr)? mine word,
and ne gehylt, ne deme ic hine ; ne cona
ic middan-eard to demanne, ac dait ic
gehaele middan-eard.

48 Saei frakann mis, yah ni andnimij)
waurda meina, habaid jjana stoyandan
sik ; waurd |)atei rodida, J?ata stoyi]) i'na
in spedistin daga.

48 Se de me forhig|>, and mine word

ne under-feh}i, he hrefj) hwa him deme
SCO spaec de ic spsec, seo him dem]) on
dam ytemestan da?ge.

49 Unte ik us mis silbin ni rodlda, ak
saei sandida mik, atta, sah mis anabusn
at •

•

•

•

49 Fordam de ic ne specc of me sylf-
um, ac se fa^der, de me sende, he nie
behead, hwset ic cwede, and h\Ya.t ic
spece.

50 And ic wat, da?t his bebod ys ece
lif ; da ping de ic sprece, ic sprece, swa
foeder me saede.

Chap. XIII. +

i JE'r dam easter-freols-
dsege se Hselend wiste, d?et his tid com,
dset lie wolde gewitan of dysum middan-
earde to his fseder, da he lufode his
leorning-cnihtas de wseron on middan-
eardc, od ende he hig lufode.

2 And da Drihtncs j)enung ws^s ge-
macod, da for se deofol on ludas heortan
Scariothes, .

. daet he hine belsewde,

.

3 He wiste daet faeder sealde ealle }'ing
on his handa, and dset he com of Gode,
and cymj) to Gode,

4 He aras fram his |)enunge, and lede
his reaf; and nam linen hroegel, and
l)egyrde hyne.

5 iEfter dam he dyde wseter on fa^t,

5^11. 43--XIII. 5] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYJSTDALE, 1526.

523

3n not be cast out of the synagoge ;

43 Forsothe thei loueden the glorie of
nen, more than the glorie of God.

44 Forsothe Jhesu cryede, and seide,
Be that bileueth in to me, bileueth not
n to me, but in to him that sente me.
45 He that seeth me, seeth him that
;ente me.
46 I li3t cam in to the world, that ech
nan that bileueth in to me, dwelle not
n derknessis.
47 And if ony man schal heere my
vordis, and schal not kepe, I deme not
lim j forsoth I cam not, that I deem
lie world, but that I make the world

;af.

48 He that dispisith me, and takith
lot my wordis, hath him that schal
uge him ; the word that I haue spoken,
-hat schal deme him in the laste day.

49 For I haue no3t spokun of my silf,
)ut the fadir, that sente me, 5af to me
I maundement, what I schal seie, and
vhat I schal speke.
50 And I woot, for his maundement is
therfore tho thingis
juerelasting lyf ;
hat I speke, as the fadir seide to me, so
'. speke.

a knowen off it, lest they shulde be ex-
communicate j

43 For they loved the prayse that is
geven off men, more then the prayse
that commeth of God.

44 Jesus cryed, and sayd, He that be-
leveth on me, beleveth nott on me, butt
on hym that sent me.
45 And he that seeth me, seeth hym

that sent me.

46 I am come a light into the worlde,
that whosoever beleveth on me, shulde
nott byde in darcknes.
47 And yf eny man heare my wordes,
and beleve nott, I iudge hym not ; for
I cam not to iudge the worlde, butt to
save the worlde.

48 He that putteth me a waye, and
receaveth nott my wordes, hathe won
that iudgeth hym ; the wordes that I
have spoken shall iudge hym in the last
daye.
49 For I have not spoken off my silfe,
but my father, which sent me, gave me
a commaundment, what I shulde saye,
and what I shulde speake.

50 And I knowe wele, that his com-
maundment ys lyfe everlastynge ; what-
soever I speake therfore, even as my
father bade me, so I speake.

Chap. XHI.

i Forsothe bifore the
eeste day of pask Jhesu witinge, for his
)ur cometh, that he passe of this world
,0 the fadir, whanne he hadde loued
lise that weren in the world, in to the
jnde he louede hem.
2 And the souper maad, whanne the
leuel hadde sent now in to the lierte
of Judas, that Judas of Symount Scari-
btli schulde bitraye liim,

3 He witinge for the fadur 3af alio
thingis to him in to liondis, and tliat he
^ente out fro God, and goth to God,

4 Tlisith fro the soupor, and j)Uttith his
jlothis ; and whanne he hadde tukun a
ynnen cloth, he bifore girdc him.
5 Aftirward he sente water in to a

Chap. XIII.

i Before the feast off
ester when Jesus knewe, that hys houre
was come, thatt he shulde departe out
of this worlde vnto the father, when he
loved his which were in the worlde, vnto
the ende he loved them.

2 And when supper was ended, after
that the devyll had put in the hert off
Judas Iscariot, Simons sonne, to bo
traye him,

3 Jesus knowynge that the father had
geven him all thingcs into liis hondcs,
and that lie was come from God, and
went to God,

4 He rose from supper, and laydc a
sydc hys vpi)cr giinncntcs ; and toke a
towcll, and gyrd hym sylfo.

.f; After that poured he water into a

5
3

3
1

524

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXOX, 995.

[St. John

and })w6h his leorning-cnihta fet, and
drigde big mid dsere lin-wsede, de be
waes mid begyrd.

6 Da com be to Sim one Pet re, and
Petrus cw£e|) to him, Dribten, scealt dii
))wean mine fet 1

7 Se Hselend andswarode, and cwa^|>
to him, Dii nast nil, doet ic do ; ac dii
wast syddan.

8 Petrus cwoej) to him, Ne }n\^-bst du
Se Hselend him and-
nsefre mine fet.
swarode and cw8e|>, Gif ic de ne ]>wea,
naefst du nanne dael myd me.

9 Da cwse]) Simon Petrus to bira,
Dribten, ne jjweh du na mine fet ane,
ac eac min beafod and mine banda.

10 Da cwsej) se Hselend to him, Se de
clsene by]?, ne be|>earf buton dast man
bis fet |)wea, ac ys call clsene ; and ge
synd sume clsene, nses na ealle.

1

He wiste witodlice, hwa byne sceokle
belsewan ; fordam he cw8e)>, Ne synd ge
ealle clsene.

12 Syddan he brefde hjTa fet ajjwogene,
he nam bis reaf; and da he sa?t, be
cwsej) eft to him, Wite ge bwtet ic eow
dydel

1

Ge clyjiiaj) me lareow and dribten,
and wel ge cweda}? ; swa ic eom s6|)lice.
14 Gif ic ])w6h eowre fet, [ic de eom
eower lareow and eower hhlford, and j;e
sceolon eac j>wcan eower aelc odres fet ;^]
15 Ic eow sealde bysne, daet ge don,

swa ic eow dyde.

16 S6})lice, ic cow secge, nys se j^cowa
furdra donne se blaford, ne se serend-
raca nys mserra donne se de byne sende.

IT

qa]>, Ki allai

hrainyai siyu]?.

12 Bi})eli ])&n usjjwoh fotuns ize, yah
nam wastyos
seinos ; anakumbyands
aftra, qaj> du im, Witudu wba gatawida
I'zwis 1

Yus wopeid mik laisareis yah fi-auya,

1

waila qi|)i[) ; "im auk.

1

14 Yabai nu us|)Woh izwis fotuns, frau-
ya yah laisareis, yah yus skuluj? i'zwis
misso jjwahan fotuns ;

Du frisahtai auk atgaf i'zwis, ei swa-
swe ik gatawida izwis, swa yus tauyai}).
16 Amen, amen, qi))a izwis, nist skalks
maiza frauyin seiuamma, nih apaustaulus
maiza ]?amma sandyandin sik.

17 pande |>ata wituj), audagai siyuj>,

17 Gif ge das ])ing witon, ge beo|i ead-

yabai tauyi}> ^ata.

18 Ni bi allans izwis qi|'a, ik wait
wharyans gawalida; ak ci usfullij' waur})i
|)ata gamelido, Saei matida mij> mis
hlaib, ushof ana mik fairzna seina.

ige, gif ge big do}?.

18 Ne secge ic be eow eallon, ic wat
hwylce ic gcceas ; ac daet da*t halige
gewrit sy gefylled, de cwy}), Se de ytt
hlaf myd me, abef}) bys ho ongean me.

19 Fram himma qi|>a izwis, faur|)izei
waur})i, ei bijjc wairjjai, galaubyai}> jjatei
Vk im.

20 Amen, amen, qi|m izwis, saei and-
nimi}> })ana J^anei ik insandya, mik and-

19 Nu ic eow secge, serdam de hyt
gewurde, daet ge gelyfon donne hyt ge-
wordcn bi|), djet ic hit eom.

20 S6}>, ic eow secge, se dc undcrfcbj)
daene de ic sende, underfebj? mc ; and se

2

;

1

;

;

XIII. 6-20.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

525

basyn, and bigan for to waische discipHs
feet, and to wype with the lynnen cloth,
with which he was bifore gird.

6 Therfore he cam to Symount Petre,
and Petre seith to him, Lord, waischist
thou to me the feet ?

7 Jhesu answeride, and seide to him,
What thingis I do, thou woost not now ;
forsothe thou schalt wite aftirwaid.

8 Petre seith to him, Thou schalt not
waische to me the feet, in to with outen
Jhesu answeride to him. If I
ende.
schal not waische thee, thou schalt not
haue part with me.

9 Symount Petre seith to him, Lord,
not oonly my feet, but and the hondis
and the heed.

10 Jhesu seide to him. He that is
waischun, hath no nede no but that he
waische the feet, but he is clene al ; and
30 ben clene, but not alle.

11 Forsothe he wiste, who schulde
bitraye him ; therfore he seide, 3^ ben
not clene alle.

1

Therfore aftir that he waischide the
feet of hem, he took his clothis ; and
whanne he hadde restid a3en, eft he
seide to hem, 3e witen what I haue done
to 30U.

13 5e clepen me maistir and lord, and

56 seyn wel ; forsoth I am.

14 Therfore if

I, lord and maistir,
haue waische 30ure feet, and 56 owen to
waische another the totlieris feet

15 For I haue ^ouun ensaumple to 50U,
that as I haue don to 30U, so and 50 do.
16 TreuH, treuli, I seie to 50U, the ser-
uaunt is not more than his lord, neither
apostle is more than he that scute him.

17 If 30 witen thes thingis, ^e schulcn

basyn, and began to washe hys disciples
fete, and to wyppe them with the towell,
where with he was gyrde.

6 Then cam he to Simon Peter, and
Peter sayde to him, Lorde, shalt thou
wesshe my fete 1

7 Jesus answered, and sayde vnto hym.
What I do, thou wottest nott nowe
thou shalt knowe here after.

8 Peter sayd vnto hym, Thou shalt not
wesshe my fete, whill the worlde stond-
Jesus answered him, Yff I wasshe
etli.
not thy fete, thou shalt have no part
with me.
^ 9 Simon Peter sayde vnto hym, Lorde,
nott my fete only, butt also my hondes
and my heed.

10 Jesus sayde to hym, He that is
wesshed, nedeth not but to wesshe his
fete, but is clene every whit ; and ye
are clene, butt nott all.

1

For he knewe his betrayer ; ther-

fore sayde he. Ye are not all clene.

12 After he had wesshed their fete,
and receaved his clothes, and was sett
doune agayne, he sayde vnto them. Wot
ye what I have done to you 1

13 Ye call me master and lorde, and

ye saye wele j for soo am I.

14 Yf I then, youre lorde and master,
have wesshen youre fete, ye alsoo ought
to wesshe one anothers fete

15 For I have geven you an ensample,
that ye shulde do, as I have done to you.
16 Verely, verely, I saye vnto you, the
servaunt is not gretter then hys master,
nether the messenger gretter then he
that sent hym.

17 Yf ye vnderstonde these thynges,

be blcssid, if 3e schulcn do hem.

happy are ye, yf ye do them.

18 I seie not of alle 30U, I woot whiche
I liauc chosun ; but that the scripture
be fillid. He that etith my breed, schal
reyse his heele a3en3 me.

19 Treuli, treuli, I seie to 30U, bifore it
be don, that whanne it schal be don, 30
bilcuc for I am.

18 I speake not off you all, I knowe
whom I have chosen ;
but that the
scripture be fulfilled, He that eateth
breed with me, hath lifte vppe his helc
againste me.

19 Nowe tell I you, before it come,
that when yt is come to passe, ye myght
belcve that I am lie.

20 Treuli, treuli, I scye to 30U, lie that
taketh whom euerc I schal sonde, re-

20 Verely, verely, I saye vnto you, lie
that rcccavcth whomsoever I scndc, re-

526

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

'i\) saci raik andnimi}), andnimij)

nimi}j ;
]?ana sandyandan mik.

qi|)ands

21 pata

lesus, indrobnoda
ahmin, yali wcitwodida, yah qa)?, Amen,
amen, qilpa, izwis, J)atei ains izwara ga-
leweij) mik.

22 panub sewhun du sis misso J?ai sip-

onyos, ]?agkyandans bi wbaryana qej^i.

23 Wasub l^an anakiimbyands ains ])\ze
siponye is in barma lesuis, J^anei fiiyoda
lesus.

24 Bandwidub J^an |)amma Seimon
Paitrus, du fraibnan, Wbas wesi, bi })anei

25 Anakumbida J;an yains swa ana
barma lesuis, qa]?ub imma, Frauya, wbas
ist 1

26 Andbof lesus, Sa ist, ]?ammei ik
Yab uf-
ufdaupyands |)ana blaif giba.
daupyands j^ana blaif, gaf ludin Seimonis
Skariotau.

27 Yab afar |>amma blaiba, jjan galaij)
Qaj? jjan du imma

in yainana Satana.
lesus, patei tauyis, tawei sprauto.

do underfeb}) me, underfeb]) dtene de me
sende.

21 Da se Hselend d<ls }>ing sivde, be
wies gedrefed on gaste, and cydde, and
cwai|). So}), ic eow secge, dset eower an
me belaew}).

22 Da leorning-cnibtas bebeold byra
selc oderne, and bim twynode be bwam
be bit ssede.

23 An daera leorning-cnibta blinode
on dses Hselendes bearme, da^ne se Hael-
end lufode.

24 Simon Petnis bicnode to disum,
and cwsej) to bim, Hwa;t ys, se de be
byt big seg}) ]

25 Witodlice da be blinode ofer dies
Hcclendes breostum, lie cwa?)) to bim,
Drib ten, bwaet ys be 1

26 Se Haelend bim andswarode and
cwaej). He ys, se de ic rsece bedyppedne
blaf. And da da be bedypte done blaf,
be sealde byne ludas Scariotbe ....

27 And da ajfter dam bitan, Satanas
Da cwse}) se Hselend to

eode on byne.
bim, Do rade, diet du don wylt.

28 patub |)an ainsbun ni wissa ];ize an-

28 Nyste nan dara sitteudra, to bwam

akumbyandane, duwbe qaj) imma.

be dset saede.

29 Sumai mundedun, ei unte arka
babaida ludas, j)atei qej)i imma lesus,
Bugei ]?izei j>aurbeima du dulj^ai, ai])])au
Jjaim unledam ei wba gibau.

30 Bij^e andnam |)ana bbaib yains, suns

galaij) ut j wasub J)an nabts.

31 pan galai}) ut, qa|? })an lesus, Nu
gasweraids warp sunus mans, yab Gu|>
baubi|)S ist in imma.

32 Yabai uu Gu)? baubij>s ist in imma,
yab Gu}^ baulieij) ina in sis, yab suns
liaubida ina.

33 Barnilona, naub Icitil mel mi|> izwis
im ;
sokeij) mik, yab, swaswe qa)) du
ludaium, Ei j^adei ik gagga, yus ni
magu)) qiman ; yab izwis qij?a nu.

34 Anabusn niuya giba izwis, ei friyo|>
izwis misso, swe ik friyoda izwis, ])ei
yab yus friyo]> misso izwis.

29 Sume wendon, fordam ludas biefde
serin, dset se Hselend bit cwsede be bim,
Bige da |>ing, de us j^earf sy to dam
freols-dcTge, odde dait be sealde sum
])ing j)earfendum mannum.

30 Da be nam dtene bitan, be eode ut

dar-ribte ; bit woes nibt.

31 Da be ut-eode, and se Hselend
cwa^|), Nu ys mannes sunn geswutelod,
and God ys geswutelod on bim.

32 Gyf God ys geswutelod on bim, and
God geswiitelaj) bine on bym sylfum. .

.

33 ^La beam, nu gyt ic eom gebwsede
tid mid eow ; gc me seca}), and, swa ic
dam ludeum saede, Ge ne magon fiiran,
dar dar ic fare ; and nu ic eow secge.

34 Ic eow sylle niwe bebod, dset ge
lufion eow betwynan, swa ic eow lufode,

XIII. 21-34-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

'

ceyuetli me ; forsotbe he tliat receyuetli
me, receyuetli him that seute me.

21 "VVhanne Jhesu hackle

seid thes
thingis, he was troblid in spirit, and
witnesside, and seide, Treuli, treuli, I
seie to 50U, oon of 50U schal bitraye me.
22 Therfore the disciplis lokiden to

gidere, doutynge of whom he seide.

23 Therfore oon of his disciplis was
restinge in the bosum of Jhesu, whom
Jhesu louede.

24 Therfore Symount Petre bekenyde
to him, and seith to him, Who is it, of
whicb he seith 1

25 And so whanne he hadde restid
a3en on the brest of Jhesu, he seith to
him, Lord, who is it ?

26 Jhesu answeride, He it is, to whom
I schal dresse breed dipped yn. And
whanne he had dippid yn breed, he 5af
to Judas of Symount Scariot.

27 And aftir the morsel, thanne Sa-
thanas entride in to him. And Jhesu
seith to him, What thing thou dost, do
thou sunnere.

28 Forsoth no man sittinge at the
mete wiste this things to what thing he
seide to him.

29 Forsothe summe gessiden, for Judas
hadde pursis, that Jhesu hadde seid to
him, Bye thou tho thingis, that ben
nedeful to vs at the feeste day, or that
he schulde 5yue sum thing to nedy men.
30 Therfore whanne he hadde take the
morsel, he wente out a non ; forsoth it
was ny3t,

31 Therfore whanne he hadde gon out,
Jhesu seide, Now mannis sone is clari-
fied, and God is clarified in him.

32 If God is clarified in him, and God
Bchal clarifye him in him silf, and a non
he schal clarifie him.
33 Litil soncs, 3it a litil I am witli 30U ;
je schulen seke me, and, as I seide to tlie
Jewis, Whidur I go, 30 mown not come;
and to 30U I seie now.

34 I 3yuc to 30U a newe maundcment,
that 30 loue to gidere, as I louedc 30U,
that and 3e loue to gcdero.

1

TYNDALE, 1526.

527
ceaveth me ; and he that receaveth me,
receaveth hym that sent me.

21 When Jesus had thus sayde, he was
troubled in his sprete, and testified, say-
inge, Verely, verely, I saye vnto you,
that won off you shall betraye me.

22' Then the disciples loked won on

another, doutinge of whom he spake.

23 There was one of his disciples which
leaned on Jesus besome, whom Jesus
loved.

24 To hym beckened Simon Peter,
off

that he shulde axe who it was,
whome he spake 1

25 He then as he leaned on Jesus
brest, sayde vnto hym, Lorde, who ys it 1

26 Jesus answered. He yt ys, to whom
I geve a soppe when I have dept hit.
And he wet a soppe, and gave ytt to
Judas Iscarioth Simons sonne.

27 And after the soppe, Satan entred
into hym. Then sayde Jesus vnto hym,
Thatt thou dost, do quycly.

28 That wist noo man at the table, for

what intent he spake vnto hym.

29 Some off them thought, be cause
Judas had the bagge, thatt Jesus had
sayd vnto hym, By those thynges, that we
have nede of against the feast, or that he
sliulde geve some thynge to the povre.

30 As sone then as he had receaved
the soppe, he went immediatly out ; and
it was nyght.

3

When he was gone out, Jesus sayde,
Nowe is the sone of man glorified, and
God is glorified by hym.
32 Yf God be glorified by him, God
shall also glorify him in him sylfe, and
shall strayght waye glorify hym.

33 Deare children, yet a lytcll whylc
am I with you ; ye shall seke me, and,
as I sayde vnto the lewcs, Whitlier I
goo, thitlicr can ye nott come ; alsoo to
you saye I nowc.
34 A newe commaundmcnt geve I vnto
you, that ye love to gcddcr, as I have
loved you, that even soo yc love one
anotlicr.

528

GOTHIC, 360.

35 Bi jjamma ufkunnanda allai,

]?ei
meinai siponyos siyuj?, yabai fria])wa
babaid mi}) izwis niisso.

36 pauuh qa)) du imma Seimou Paitrus,
Frauya, whad gaggis 1 Andbafyands le-
sus qa]), padci ik gagga, ni magt mik nu
laistyau, ij) bi])C laisteis.

37 parub Paitrus qaj? du 'imma, Frauya,
Saiwala

duwbe ni mag jjuk laistyan nu 1
meina faur })uk lagya.

38 Andbof iiesus, Saiwala |)cina faur
mik lagyis 1 Amen, amen, qi|)a })us, ]>ei
hana ni brukeij), unte J)U mik afaikis
kunnan ))rim sin];am.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

35 Be dam oncnawa}) ealle men, dset
ge synd mine leorning-cnibtas, gif ge
babbaj) lufe eow betwynan.

36 Simon Petrus cwa?]) to him, Dribten,
hwyder gsest du 1
Se Hselend him
andswarode and cwre]), Ne mibt dii me
fyban, dyder ic mi fare, dii fa^rst eft
sefter me.

37 Petrus cwaij) to him, Hwi ne mneg
Ic sylle min lif for de.

ic de nu fyban ]

38 Se Hselend him andswarode and
cw0e|), Din bf du sylst for me 1
So)),
ic de secge, ne crsew]) se cocc, ser dii
wid-ssecst me ])riwa.

Chap. XIV.

i

Ni indrobnai izwar
bairto; .... galaubei}) du Gu]?a, yah
du mis galaubei]?.

2 In garda attins meinis sabjjwos raan-
a)? pan niba weseina, ai|)pau
agos sind ;
qejjyau du izwis, gagga manwyan stad
izwis.

3 Yah |)an ya})ai gagga, manwya i'zwis
stad, aftra qima, yah franima izwis du
mis silbin, ei })arei im ik, j^arub siyu]?
yab yus.

4 Yah |>adei ik gagga, kunnuj), yah

J;ana wig kunnu)?.
5 parub qa}) imma pomas, Frauya, ni
witum wba|> gaggis, yah whaiwa maguin
jjana wig kunuan 1

Chap. XIV.

"''i And he ewve]) to bis
leorning-cnibtum, Ne sy eower beorte
gedrefed ;
. ge gelyfaj) on God, and
gel y fa

on me.

.

.

J)

2 On mines feeder biise synd manega
eardung-stowa ; ne ssede ic eow, byt ys
lytles wana, dset ic fare and wylle eow
eardung-stowe gegearwian.
3 And gif ic fare, and eow eardung-
stowe gegearwige, eft ic cume, and nime
eow to me sylfum, di^t ge syn, dair ic
eom.

4 And ge witon, hwyder ic fare, and

ge cunnon done weg.

5 Thomas cwa')? to him, Dribten, we
nyton hwyder dii faerst, and bii mage
we done weg cunnan ?

6 QaJ) imma lesus, Ik im sa wigs, yah
sunya, yab Hbains ; ainsbun ni qimi^ at
attin, niba |>airb mik.

7 I|) kunj)edei|> mik, aijjjjau kunj^edeij)
))an fram

yab attan meinana ; yah
himma kunnu]? iua, yab gasaiwhij? ina.

6 Se Hselend cwve]> to him, Ic eom
weg, and soj'fa^stnys, and lif ; ne cymj)
nan to fasdcr, buton })urb me.

7 Gif ge ciidon me, witodlice ge cudon
minne fa?der ; and beonon-forj) ge byne
gecnawaj), and ge bine gcsawon.

•8 Ijj Filippus qa|)ub du imma, Frauya,
|)atub ganah
augei unsis ]7aua attan,
unsis.

9 parub qa}) imma lesus, Swabiud
melis mi|; izwis was, yali ni ufkun|)es
mik 1
Filippu, saei gasawb mik, ga-
sawh attan. Yah whaiwa ]>u qi|>is, Augei
unsis pana attan ?

8 Philippus cwa?}) to him, Dribten, a-t-
yw us done fivder, and we babbaj) genob.

9 Se Hselend cwa?]) to him, Philippus,
swa lange tid ic wa^s mid eow, and ge
ne gecneowon me 1
Se de me gesyb)?,
gesyhj) minne feeder. Hiimeta cwyst du,
iEt-yw us dinne feeder ?

XIII. 35.-XIV. p.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

529

35 Iq this thing alle men schulen
if 36

knowe, for 56 ben my discii^lis,
schulen haue loue to gidere.

36 Symount Petre seith to hym, Lord,
Jhesu answeride,
whidir goist thou 1
Whidir I go, thou maist not sue me
now, but thou schalt sue aftirward.

37 Petre seith to him, Whi may I not
I schal putte my soule"*"

sue thee now 1
for thee.

38 Jhesu answeride, Thou schalt putte
thi soule"*" for me 1
TreuU, treuli, I seie
to thee, the koc schal not crowe, til
thou schalt denye me thries.

35 By thys shall all men knowe, that
ye are my disciples, yf ye shall have
love Avon to a nother.

36 Simon Peter sayd vnto hym, Lorde,
Jesus answered
whither goest thou 1
hym, Whither I goo, thou canst not
folowe me nowe, thou shalt folowe me
afterwardes.
37 Peter sayd vnto hym, Lorde, why
cannot I folowe the nowe ?
I will geve
my lyfe for thy sake.

38 Jesus answered hym. Wilt thou geve
thy lyfe for my sake ?
Verely, verely, I
saye vnto the, the cocke shall nott crowe,
till thou have denyed me thryse.

Chap. XIV.

i And he seith to his
disciplis, Be not ^oure herte disturblid,
nether drede it ; ^e bileucn in to God,
and bileue 3e in to me.

2 In the hous of my fadir ben many
dwellingis ; if any thing lesse, I hadde
seid to 30U, for I go for to make redy
to 30U a place.

Chap. XIV.

i And he sayde vnto
hys disciples, Lett nott youre hertes be
. beleve in God, and beleve
trubled; .
in me.

.

2 In my fathers housse are many man-
sions ; if it were not soo, I wolde have
tolde you, I goo to prepare a place for
you.

3 And if I schal go, and schal make
redy to 30U a place, eftsoone I schal
come, and I schal take 30U to my sllf,
that where I am, and 3e be.

4 And whidur I go, 36 witen, and 36

witen the wey.

5 Thomas seith to him, Lord, we witen
not whidur thou goist, and hou mown
we wite the weye ?

6 Jhesu seith to him, I am weye,
treuthe, and lyf ; no man cometh to the
fadir, no but by me.

7 If 3e hadden knowen me, sothli 30
hadden knowen and my fadir ; and aftir-
ward 30 schulen knowe him, and 3c han
Bcyn him.

8 Philip seith to him. Lord, schcwe to

3

I will come agayne,
and receve you even vnto myselfe, that
where I am, theare maye ye be also.

4 And whither I goo, ye knowe, and

the waye ye knowe.

5 Thomas sayde vnto him, Lorde, we
knowe not whyther thou goest, also
howe is it possible for vs to knowe the
waye 1
6 Jesus sayde vnto hym, I am the
waye, verite, and lyfe ; no man commeth
vnto the father, but by me.

7 Yf ye had knowen me, ye liad
knowen my father alsoo ; and nowe ye
knowe hym, and ye have senc hym.

8 Phillip said vnto him, Lorde, shew

vs the fadir, and it suffisith to vs.

vs thy father, and it suffiscth vs.

9 Jhesu seith to him, So moche tyme
1 am with 30U, and han 3c not knowun
Philip, he that secth me, sceth
nic ]
and the fadir.
IIou seist thou, »Schewe
to V8 the fadir ?

9 Jesus sayde vnto him, Have I bene
so longc time with you, and yet hast
thou not knowen me 1
Philij), lie that
hath sene mc, hath scne the father.
And howe saycst thou then, Shewc vs
the father ?

M ni

1
1

>,'^0

;

;

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

10 Niu galaubeis, })atei ik in attin, }ali
po waurcla jjoei ik

atta 'in mis ist?
rodya izwis af mis silbin
ak atta saei in mis ist, sa tauyijj ])0
Avaurstwa.

ni rodya

1

Galaubei}) mis, j^atei ik in attin, yah
Ij) yabai ni, in jjize waurst-

atta in mis.
we galaubei)) mis.

12 Amen, amen, qij^a izwis, saei ga-
laubei d mis, |)0 waurstwa Jjoei ik tauya
yah is tauyij? ; yah maizona jjaim tauyij),
unte ik du attin gagga.

I o Ne gelyfst dii daet ic eom on f«der,
and feeder ys on me 1 Da word de ic
to eow sprece ne sprece ic hi of me
sylfum ; se ffeder de wuna)) on me, he
wyrc)) da weorc.

I I Ne gelyfe ge, daet ic eom on feeder,
and faeder ys on me? Gelyfa)) for dam
weorcum.

12 So)), ic eow secge, se de gelyf)) on

me, lie wyrc)) da weorc de ic wyrce
and he wyrc)) maran donne da syud,
fordam de ic fare to feeder.

13 Yah jjatei wha bidyi}) in namin
meinamma, j^ata tauya, ei hauhyaidau
atta in sunau.

13 And ic do, swa hwaet swa ge bidda))
on minum nam an, daet feeder sig ge-
wuldrod on suna.

14 Yabai whis bidyij) mik in namin

14 Gif ge hwset me bidda)) on minum

meinamma, ik tauya.

naman, daet ic do.'''

T 5 Yabai mik friyo)?, anabusnins meinos

15 Gif ge me lufia)), healda)) mine be-

fastaid.

16 Yah ik bidya attan, yah anj^^arana
parakletu gibi}) izwis, ei siyai mij? izwis
du aiwa,

17 Ahma sunyos ; ]?anei so manaseijjs
ni mag niman, unte ni saiwhi|> ina, nili
kann ina.
1]> yus kunnu)? ina, unte is
mij) izwis wisij?, yah in izwis ist.

bodu.

16 And ic bidde faeder, and he syl))
eow oderne frefriend, da:t bco aefre mid
eow,

17 S6|)faestnysse gjist ; de des middan-
cftrd ne maeg undeifon, he ne can hyne,
fordam de he ne gesyh)) hyne. Ge hyne
cunnon, fordam de he wuna)) mid eow,
and bi)) on eow.

18 Ni leta izwis widuwairnans, qima

t8 Ne laete ic eow steop-cild, ic cume

at izwis.

19 Nauh leitil, yah so manasei}>s mik
ni ])anasei|?s saiwhij? ; i]> yus saiwhi|> mik,
J>atei ik lil)a, yah yus libai]?.

20 In yainamma daga ufkunnaij) yus,
])atei ik in attin meinamma, yah yus in
mis, yah ik in izwis.

2

Saei habaid anabusnins meinos, yah
fastaij) I'os, sa ist saei friyoj? mik ; yah
]>an saei friyoj) mik, friyoda frani attin
meinamma, yah ik friyo ina, yah ga-
bairlitya imnia mik silban.

to eow.

19 Nil gyt ys an lytel f)Tst, and middan-
eard me ne gesyh)) ; ge me geseo)), fordam
ic lybbe, and ge lybba)).

20 On dam daege ge gecnawa)), daet ic
eom on minum faeder, and ge synd on
me, and ic eom on eow.

21 Se de hcef)) mine bebodu, and hylt
da, lie ys de me lufa)) ; min faeder lufa))
dzene de me lufa)', and ic lufige hyne,
and geswiitelige him me sylfne.

22 paruh qnj) imma ludas, ni sa Is-
karyotcs, Frauya, wha war}>,
ei unsis
munais gabairhtyan ))uk silban, ij; J)izai
manascdai ni 1

23 Andhof lesus, yah qa)) du imma,
Yabai whas mik friyoj), yah waurd mein
fastai]) ; yah atta mcins friyo)) ina, yah

22 ludas cwa?)) to him, naes na se
Scarioth, Drihten, liwaet ys geworden,
di\}t dii wylt de sylfne geswiitelian us,'
naes middan-carde ?

23 Se Hsclend and.swarode, and cwae))
to hira,^ Gif hwa me lufa)), he hylt mine
sprsece ; and min faeder lufa)) bine, and

2
1

8
1
1

XIV. 10-23.] WYCLIFFE, J389.

TYNDALE, 1K26.

531

10 Bileuest not thou, for I am in the
fadir, and the fadir is in me 1
I speke
not of my silf the wordis that I speke
to 50U ; sothli the fadir dwellinge in me,
he doith the workis.

1

Beleue ^e not, for I am in the fadir,
Ellis bileue ^e

and the fadir is in me ?
for thilke workis.

TO Belevest thou nott, that I am in
the father, and the father in me 1
The
wordes that I speake vnto you, I speake
not of my silfe ; but the father dwellinge
in me, is he that doeth the workes.

1

Bel eve that I am in the father, and
Att the leest beleve

the father in me.
me for the very workes sake.

1

Treuli, treuli, I seie to 50U, he that
bileueth in to me, and he schal do the
workis that I do ; and he schal do more
workis than thes, for I go to the fadir.

13 And what euere thing ^e schulen
axe the fadir in my name, I schal do
this thing, that the fadir be glorified in
the sone.

14 If 5e schulen axe ony thing in my

name, I schal do it.

15 If 56 louen me, kepe 56 my co-

maundementis.

16 And I schal preie the fadir, and
he schal 5yue to 50U another coum-
fortour,

17 The spirit of treuthe, that he dwelle
with 30U into with outen ende ; which
spirit the world may not take, for it
seeth not him, neither woot him.
For-
sothe 3e schulen knowe him, for he
schal dwelle at 50U, and he schal be
in 50U.

12 Verely, verely, I saye vnto you,
whosoever beleueth on me, the workes
that I doo the same shall he do ; and
gretter workes then these shall he do,
be cause I go vnto my father.

13 And whatsoever ye axe in my name,
that will I do, that the father might be
glorified by the sonne.

14 Yf ye shal axe eny thynge in my

name, I will do it.

15 Yf ye love me, kepe my commaund-

mentes.

16 And I will praye my father, and he
shall geve you a nother comforter, that
he maye byde with you ever,

17 Which is the sprete of truthe,
whome the worlde cannot receave, be
cause the worlde seyth him not, nether
Butt ye knowe him,
knoweth hym.
for he dwelleth with yoU; and shalbe
in you.

18 I schal not leeue 30U fadirlees, I

1

I will nott leave you comfortlesse,

schal come to 50U.

I will come vnto you.

19 3it a litil, and the world seeth not
me now ; forsoth 56 schulen se me, for
I lyue, and ^e schulen lyue.

20 In that day ^e schulen knowe, for
I am in my fadir, and 3ee in me, and I
in 30U.

21 He that hath my comaundementis,
and kepitli hem, he it
is that loueth
me ; sothli he that loueth me, schal
be loucd of my fadir, and I schal loue
him, and I schal schewc to him my silf.

22 Judas scith to him, not he of
Bcarioth, Lord, what is don, for thou
art to schewe to vs thi silf, and not
to the world 1

23 Jhesus answcridc, and seidc to liim,
If oiiy man loueth me, he sclial kepe my
word ; and my fadir schal loue him, and

19 Hit is yet a litell whyle, and the
worlde seyth me noo moare ; but ye
shall se me, for I live, and ye shall live.
20 That daye shall ye knowe, that I
am in my father, and my father in me,
and I in you.

2

He that hath my commaundmentes,
and kcpeth them, the same is he that
loveth me ; and he that lovcth me,
shalbe loved of my father, and I will
love him, and will showe myne awne
silfe vnto him.

22 Judas sayd vnto him, not Judas
Iscarioth, Lorde, what is the cause, that
thou wilt shewe thy silfe vnto vs, and
not vnto the worlde 1

23 Jesus answered, and saydo vnto
liym, Yf a man love me, and wyll kcpc
my sayinges ; my father also will love

M m 2

532

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

;

(Ill inima galei})OS, yah salijjwos at im-
ma gatauyos.

24 ijj saei ni frioj?

|)0 waiirda
meina ni fastaij? ; yah j^ata waurd Jjatei
hausei}), iiist mein, ak ))is sandy aiidins
niik, attins.

iiiik,

25 pata rodida izwis, at 'izwls wisands ;

sa

26 Aj?]?an

parakletus, Ahma sa
in namin
Weiha, )ninei
mehiamma, sa izwis laisei}) allata, yah
gamaudeij? izwis allis, jatei qa]j du iz-
wis.

sandei}) atta

27

bileij^a

Gawairjji

gawair|)i
niein giba izwis ; ni swaswe so manase|>s
gibi[), ik giba izwis ; ni indrobnaina
izwara hairtona, nih faurhtyaina.

izwis,

28 Hausidedu]>, ei ik qaj? izwis, Ga-
lcij)a, yah qima at izwis.
Yabai friyo-
dedei}> niik, aij^jjau yus faginodcdei|i, ei
ik gagga du attin, unte atta meins
maiza mis ist.

29 Yah nu qa)) izwis, fauij)izei waur)?i,

ei bi]?e wairjjai, galaubyai)\

30 panaseij)S fiUi ni ma|)lya mi|> izwis

qiini]) saei jjizai manasedai reikino]?, yah
in mis ni bigitij? waiht.

31 Ak ei ufkunnai so manasejs, j^atei
ik friyoda attan meinana, yali swaswe
anabaud mis atta, swa tauya.
Urreisij),
gaggam ]>a|)ro.

we cuma|>
eardung-stowa mid him.

to

him, and we wyrca|)

24 Se (te me ne lufa|), ne hylt he mine
sprscca ; and nis hyt min sprsec, de ge
geliyrdon, ac dses ladder, de me sende.

25 Das ping ic eow ssede, da ic mid

eow wunode ;

26 Se Halga Frofre Giist, de fieder
sent on minum naman, eow laer}> ealle
))ing, and he \xr\> eow ealle da ]?ing, de

27 Ic Iscfe eow sibbe, ic sylle eow mine
sibbe ; ne sylle ic eow sibbe, swa middan-
eard syl}) ; ne sy eower heorte gedrefed,
ne ne forhtige ge.

28 Ge geliyrdon, dset ic eow ssede, Ic
ga, and ic cume to eow.
Witodlice gif
ge me lufedon, ge geblissodon, fordam
de ic fare to feeder, fordam fseder ys
niara donne ic.

29 And mi ic eow ssede, serdam de hit
gewurde, doet ge gelyfon, donne hit ge-
worden bi|).

30 Ne sprece ic mi na fela wid eow ;
dysses middan-eardes ealdor cym|>, and
he nsefj? nan J>ing on me.

31 Ac daet middan-eard oncnawe, dirt
ic lufige fseder, and ic do, swa fieder me
behead.

A'risa)), uton gan heoiiou.

Chap. XV.

i Ik im weinatriu jjata
sunyeino, yah atta meins waurstwya 1st.
2 All taine in mis unbairandaiie akran
go)>, usnimi}> ita ; yah all akran bairand-
ane, gahraineij) ita, ei managizo akran
bairaina.

Chap. XV.

^i Ic eom s6\> win-eard,

and min fieder ys cor|)-tilia.

2 He dejj aelc twig aweg on me, de
blacda ne byr)? ; and he feormaj> aclc
dara, de blaeda byr}>, diet hyt here blaeda
de swidor.

3 Yu yus hrainyai siyu]), in })is waurdis
juitei rodida du izwis.

3 Nu ge synd claene, for dsere spraece
de ic to eow sproec.

4 Wisai|> in mis, yah ik in izwis ; swe
sa woinatains ni mag akran bairan af
sis silbiii, niba ist ana weinatriwa, swah
nih yus, niba in mis siyuj;.

4 Wuniaj) on me, and ic on eow ; swa
twig ne ma\L!^ bhrda bcran him sylf,
biiton hit wuiiige on win-earde, swa ge
ne magon eac, biiton ge wunion on me.

XIV. 24.-XV. 4.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, J520.

533

we schulen come to him, and we schulen
make dwellinge at him.

24 He that loueth me not, kepith not
my wordis ; and the word which ^e han
herd, is not myn, but his that sente me,
the fadris.

him, and we woll come vnto him, and
wyll dwell wyth hym.

24 He that loveth me not, kepeth nott
my sayinges ; and the wordes which ye
heare, are nott myne, but my fathers,
which sent me.

25 Thes thingis I haue spokun to 50U,

25 This have I spoken vnto you, beynge

dwellinge at 30U ;

26 Forsoth the Hooly Gost, coum-
fortour, whom the fadir schal sende in
my name, he schal teche 50U alle thingis,
and schal schewe"*" to 50U alle thingis,
what euer thingis I schal seye to 50U.

27 Pees I leeue to 50U, my pees I ^yue
to 50U ; not as the world ^yueth, I 5yue
to 50U ; be not 30ure herte disturblid,
neither drede it.

28 3e han herd, for I seide to 50U, I
go, and come to 30U.
If ^e louedyn
me, forsoth •^e schulden haue ioye, for I
go to the fadir, for the fadir is more
than I.

29 And now I haue seid to 30U, bifore
it be don, that whanne it schal be don,
56 bileue.

30 Now I schal not speke many thingis
to 50U ; forsoth the prince of this world
Cometh, and he hath not ony thing in
me.

31 But that the world knowe, for I
loue the fadir, and as the fadir ^af co-
maundement to me, so I do.
Ryse 56,
go we hennis.

yett present with you j

26 But that comforter, which is the
Holy Gost, whom my father will sende
in my name, shall teache you all thynges,
and brynge all thynges to youre re-
membraunce, whatsoever I have tolde
you.

27 Peace I leve with you, my peace
I geve vnto you ; nott as the worlde
geveth, geve I vnto you ; lett not youre
hertes be greved, nether feare ye.

28 Ye have herde, howe I saide vnto
you, I goo, and come agayne vnto jou.
Yf ye loved me, ye wolde verely reioyce,
be cause I sayde, I goo vnto the father,
for the father is gretter then I.

29 And nowe have I shewed you, be-
fore it come, that when it is come to
passe, ye myght beleve.

30 Here after will I not talke many
wordes vnto you ; for the chefe ruelar
off thys worlde commeth, and hath
nouojht in me.

31 But that the worlde maye knowe,
that I love my father, and as my father
gave me commaundment, even soo do I.
Ryse, lett vs goo hence.

Chap. XV. i I am a verri vyne, and

my fadir is an erthe tilier.

2 Ech syoun^ not berynge fruit in me,
he schal do a wey it; and ech that berith
fruit, he schal purge it, that it more
bere fruit.

3 Now 30 ben clenc, for the word that
I haue spokun to 30U.

4 Dwell 3c in me, and I in 30U ; as a
braunche may not make fruit of him
eilf, no but it schal dwcllc in the vyne,
so nether 3c, no but 3c schulen dwcllc
in me.

Chap. XV.

i I am the true vyne,

and my father ys an husbandeman.

2 Every braunche that bearcth nott
frute in me, he will take awaye ; and
every braunche that bearcth frute, will
he pourge, that it maye bringe moare
frute.

3 Nowe are ye cleanc, be the meanes
of the wordes which I have spoken vnto

4 Byde in mc, and I in you ; as the
braunche cannot bcare frute off it sylfe,
cxccptc it byde in the vyne, no more
can ye, exccpte ye abyde in mc.

1

6

;

534

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

5 Ik im ))ata weinatriu, i}> yus weina-
Saci wisi{> in mis, yah ik in
tainos.
imma, sa bairi}) akran manag, |)atei luuh
mik ni maguj> tauyan ni waiht.

5 Ic eom win-eard, and ge synd twigu.
Se de wunaj) on me, and ic on him, se
byrj) mycle blaeda, fordam ge ne magon
nan \>mg don butan me.

6 Niba saei wisi}? in mis, uswairpada
; yah
ut swe weinatains, yah gajaursnij?
galisada, yah in fon gaUigyand, yah
inbranyada.

6 Gif hwa ne ^vuna|? on me, he by|>

aworpen ut swa twig, and fordruwaj?
and hig gaderia}? da, and doj) on fyr,
and hig forbyrnaj?.'*'

7 A})])an yabai siyu|> in mis, yah waurda
meina in izwis sind, j)atawhah Jiei wilei]),
bidyij), yah wair|)i|j izwis.

7 Gyf ge wunia)> on me, and mine word
wunia}? on eow, bidda)>, swa hwaet swa
ge wyllon, and hyt by^ eower.

8 In Jjamma hauhij>s 1st atta meins, ei
akran manag bairaij), yah wairj^ai}? meinai
siponyos.

9 Swaswe friyoda mik atta, swah ik
friyoda izwis ; wisai]? in fiia])wai meinai.

8 On dam ys min feeder geswutelod,
dset ge beron mycele blseda, and beon
mine leorning-cnihtas.

9 And ic lufode eow, swa faeder lufode

me J wuniaj) on minre lufe.

10 Yabai anabusnins meinos fastaid,
siyuj) in fria}?wai meinai ; swaswe ik
anabusnins attins meinis fastaida, yah
wisa in friajjwai is.

1

pata rodida izwis, ei fahe]?s meina
in izwis siyai, yah faheds izwara usfuU-
yaidau.

10 Gif ge mine bebodu gehealda]?, ge
wunia]? on minre lufo ; swa ic geheold
mines fajder bebodu, and ic wunige on
hys lufe.

11 Das jjing

ic eow siede, dsst min
gefea sy on eow, and eower gefea sy
gefulled.^

12 pata ist anabusns meina, ei friyoj)

12 Dis ys min bebod, dset ge lufion

izwis misso, swaswe ik friyoda izwis.

13 Maizein ))izai

fria])wai manna ni
habaij^, ei whas saiwala seina lagyi)? faur
friyonds seinans.

14 Yus friyonds meinai siyu|7, yabai

eow gerasenelice, swa ic eow lufode.

13 Naef)) nan man maran lufe donne
deos ys, daet hwa sylle his lif for his
freondum.

14 Ge synd mine frynd, gif ge doj) da

tauyi[>, Jjatei ik anabiuda izwis.

j)ing, de ic eow bebeode.

15 panasei)>s izwis ni qij>a skalkans,
unte skalks ni wait, wha tauyij) is frauya;
'i\> ik izwis qa}) friyonds, unte all j^atei
haiisida at attin meinamma, gakannida
izwis.

15 Ne telle ic eoAV to jjcowan, fordam
se })eowa niit, hwset se hhiford de\> ; ic
tealde eow to freondum, fordam ic cydde
cow, ealle da J)ing de ic gehyrde a^t
minum fseder.

16 Ni yus mik gawalideduj), ak ik ga-
walida izwis ;
. ei yus sniwaij^, yah
akran bairai|>, yah akran izwar du aiwa
siyai ; ei Jjatawhah })ci bidyaij? attau in
namin meinamma, gibi}> izwis.

.

.

1

Ne gecure ge me, ac ic geceas eow ;
and ic sette eow, dret ge gan, and blseda
beron, and eowre blseda gelseston ; da^t
fseder sylle eow, swa hwaet swa ge biddajj
on minum naman.^

17 pata anabiuda izwis, ei friyo)' izwis

17 Das ]nug ic cow beode, dat ge

misso.

lufion eow gemsenelice.

18 Yabai so manaseds izwis fiyai, kun-

ncij>, ei mik fruman izwis fiyaida.

18 Gif middan-eard eow hata]>, wita]',

diet he hatede me ser eow.

19 Yabai ])is fairwhaus weseih, ai]'jn\u

19 Gif ge of middan-earde weeron,

6
1

;

8
3

.

XV. 5-19] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

535

5 I am a vyne, ^e hen tlie braimchis.
He that (hvellith in me, and I in him,
this berith moche fruit, for with outen
me 36 mown no thing do.

6 If ony man schal not dwelle in me,
he schal be sent out as a braunche, and
schal wexe drye j and thei schulen ga-
dere him, and thei schulen sende him in
to the fier, and he brenneth.

7 If 3e schulen dwelle in me, and my
wordis schulen dwelle in 50U, what euere
thing 5e schulen wilne, ^e schulen axe,
and it schal be do to 50U.
8 In this thing my fadir is clarified,
that 3e bi-jTige moost fruyt, and ^e be
maad my disciplis.
9 As my fadir louede me, and I louyde
30U ; dwelle 3e in my loue.

10 If 36 schulen kepe my comaunde-
mentis, 3e schulen dwelle in my loue
as and I haue kept the comaundementis
of my fadir, and I dwelle in his loue,

Thes thingis I spak to 30U, that my

1

ioye be in 30U, and 30ure ioye be fillid.

12 This is my comaundement, that 3e

loue to gidere, as I louede 30U.

13 No man hath more loue than this,
that ony man putte his soule"*" for his
frendis.

14 3e ben my frendis, if 36 schulen do

tho thingis, that I comaunde to 30U.

15 Now I schal not seye 30U ser-
uauntis, for the seruaunt woot not, what
his lord schal do ; forsothe I haue seid
30U frendis, for alle thingis what euere I
herde of my fadir, I haue maad knowun
to 30U.

1

3e han not chosun me, but I chees
30U ; and I haue put 30U, that 3e go,
and brynge fruit, and 30ure fruit dwelle;
that what euere thing 30 schulen axe
the fadir in my name, he 3yue to 30U.

17 Thes thingis I comaunde to 30U,

5 I am the vyne, and ye are the
He that abydeth in me,
brauuches.
and I in hym, the same bryngeth forth
moche frute, for with out me can ye do
nothynge.

6 Yff a man byde nott in me, he ys
cast forthe as a braunche, and is wyd-
dered ; and men gadder them, and cast
them into the fyre, and they burne.

7 Yff ye byde in me, and my wordes
also bide in you, axe what ye will, and
it shalbe geven you.

8 Heare in is my father glorified, that
ye beare moche fi'ute, and be made my
disciples.

9 As my father hath loved me, even
soo have I loved you ; continue in my
love.

10 Yf ye shall kepe my commaund-
mentes, ye shall byde in my love ; even
as I have kept my fathers commaund-
mentes, and byde in his love.

ri These thinges have I spoken vnto
you, that my ioye myght remayne in
you, and that youre ioye myght be full.
12 Thys ys my commaundment, that

ye love togedder, as I have loved you.

1

Gretter love then this hath no man,
then that a man bestowe his lyfe for his
frendes

14 Ye are my frendes, yf ye do what-

soever I commaunde you.

15 Hence forth call I you nott ser-
vauntes, for the servaunt knoweth nott,
what hys lorde doeth ; butt you have I
called frendes, for all thynges that I have
herde of my father, I have opeuned to
you.

16 Ye have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you ; and ordeyned you, that ye
goo, and bringe forthe frute, and that
youre frute remayne ; that whatsoever
ye shall axe off my father in my name,
he shulde geve it you.

17 This commaunde I you, that ye

that 30 loue to gidcrc.

love to gedder.

18 If the world hatith 30U, witc 3c,
for it hadde me in hate first than
30U.

1

Yf the worlde hate you, ye knowe,

that he hated mc before he hated you.

19 If 3c haddcn be of the world, the

19 Yf ye were of the worlde, tho

;

536

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

so manaseds swesans friyodedi ;
ajjjjan
unte us jjamma fairwhau ni siyu|>, ak 'ik
gawalida izwis us jjanima fairwhau, du]j|'e
fiyaid izwis so inanase|>s.

20 Gamunei|> j)is waurdis, j-atei 'ik qaj)
du 'izwis, Nist skalks maiza frauyin
Yabai mik wrekun, yah
seinamma.
izwis wrikand ; yabai mein waurd fast-
aidcdcina, yah izwar fastaina.

middan-eard lufode c!a?t his wses; fordam
de ge ne synd of middan-earde, ac ic eow
geceas of middan-earde, fordi middan-
eard eow hataj?.

20 GemunaJ) minre spracce, dc ic eow
ssede, Nis se jjeowa maerra donne his
Gif hi me ehton, hi wylla})
hlaford.
gif hi mme sprsece hcold-
eh tan eower ;
on, hi healdaj) eac eowre.

21 Ak jjata allata tauyand 'izwis 'in
namins meinis, mite iii kunnun |)ana
sandyandan mik.

21 Ac ealle das }?ing hi doj) eow for
minum naman, fordam de hi ne cunnon
done de me sende.

22 Nib qemyau, yah rodidedyau du
i\> nu

'im, frawaurlit ni habaidedeiiia ;
inilons ni haband bi frawaurht seina.

22 Gif ic ne come, and to him ne
spraece, nsefdon hig nane synne ; mi hi
nabba|> nane hide be hyra synne.

23 Saei mik fiyai]), yah attan meinaua

23 Se de me hataj?, hata|> mmne feeder.

fiyai}).

24 I)? ])0 waurstwa ni gatawidedyau 'in
'im, Jjoei anjjar ainshun ni gatawida, fra-
'i[) nu yah ga-
waurht ni habaidedeina ;
sewhun mik, yah fiyaideduu yah mik
yah attan mein ana.

25 Ak ei usfuUnodedi waurd, j^ata ga-
melido in witoda 'ize, Ei fiyaidedun mik
arwyo.

26 A|)|)an |>an qimij) parakletus, j^anei
'ik insandya 'izwis fram attin, ahman
sunyos, 'izei fram attin urrinni|>, sa weit-
wodeij? bi mik

24 Gif ic nane weorc ne -vvorlite on
him, de nfm oder ne worlite, niefdon hi
n;me synne ; mi hi gesawon, and hi
hatcdon segder ge me ge mimic fa'der.

25 Ac dset seo spraec sy gefylled, de
on liyra ae awriten ys, Da3t hi hatedou
me biitan gewyi-htum."*"

26 Donne se frefriend cym|>, de ic eow
sende fram fa^der, s6|)fa?stiiysse g;ist, de
cymj) fram fseder, he cy\> gewitnesse be
me ;

27 Yah jjan yus weitwodei]>, unte fram

27 And ge cydaj) gewitnesse, fordam

fruma mi^ mis siyu)>.

ge waeron fram fruman mid me.

Chap. XVT.

i pata rodida izwis, ei

Chap. XVI. 1 Das |)ing ic eow ssede.

ni afmarzyaindau.

dxt ge ne swicion.

2 Us gaqum|)im dreiband 'izwis, akci
qimij) whcila, ei sawhazuh "izei usqimij)
'izwis, jjuggkei)) hunshi salyan Gujja.

2 Hi do}) eow of gesomnungum, ac seo
tid cym|i, daet selc de eow ofslyhj), wen])
da?t he jjenige Gode.

3 Yah jiata tauyand, unte ni ufkun))-

3 And das |)ing hig doJ), fordam de hi

edun attan, nih mik.

ne ciidon miune faeder, ne me.

80 wheila ize, gamuneij) j?ize,

4 Akei j)ata rodida Yzwis, ei h\\>e qimai
}^atei ik
!]> )?ata izwis fram fruma ni

qa}) izwis.

4 Ac das })ing ic eow saede, daet ge
gemunon, donne hyra tid cym}>, da?t
ic hit eow saede. Ne saede ic eow dds

1

XV. 20.-XVL 4.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

537

world schulde loue that thing that was
his ; but for ^e ben not of the world,
but I chees 30U fi'o the world, therfore
the world hatith 50U.

20 Haue 56 mynde of my word, which
I seide to 30U, The seruaunt is not more
If thei han pursuwed
than his lord.
me, and thei schulen pursue 50U ; if thei
han kept my word, and thei schulen
kepe 5oure.

2

But thei schulen do to 50U alle thes
thingis for my name, for thei witen not
him that sente me.

22 If I hadde not come, and hadde not
spoke to hem, thei schulden not haue
synne ; forsoth now thei han not excusa-
cioun of her synne.
23 He that hatith me, hatith and my
fadir.

24 If I hadde not don werkis in hem,
whiche non othir man dide, thei schulden
not haue synne ; forsoth now and thei
han seyn, and hatid me and my fadir.

25 But that the word be fillid, that is
writun in the lawe of hem, For thei
badden me in hate with outen cause.'''

26 Forsoth whanne the cumfortour
3clial come, which I schal sende to 30U
Pro the fadir, a spirit of treuthe, the
^vliiche procedith^ of the fadir, he schal
bcre witnessing of me ;
27 And 36 schulen here witnessing, for
je ben with me fro the bigynnyng.

worlde wolde love his awne ; be cause
ye are not of the worlde, but I have
chosen you out of tlie worlde, therfore
hateth you the worlde.

20 Remember my sayinge, that I sayde
vnto you. The servaunte is not gretter
then his lorde. Yf they have persecuted
me, so will they persecute you ; yff they
have kept my sayinge, so will they kepe
youres.

21 But all these thynges will they do
vnto you for my names sake, be cause
they have nott knowen hym that sent
me.

22 Yf I had not come, and spoken
vnto them, they shulde have no synne j
b#tt nowe have they nothynge to cloke
theyr synne with all.

23 He that hateth me, hateth my

father.

24 Iff I had nott done workes amonge
them, which none other man did, they
shulde be with oute synne ; but nowe
have they sene, and yet have hated bothe
me and my father.

25 Even thatt the sayinge myght be
fulfilled, that is written in theyr lawe.
They hated me with outt a cause.

26 Butt when the comforter is come,
whom I will sende vnto you from the
father, wich is the sprete of verite, which
proceadeth off the father, he shall testifie
off me ;

27 And ye shall beare witnes also, be-
cause ye have bene with me from the
begyunynge.

Chap. XVI.

i Thes thingis I haue
?pokun to 30U, that 36 ben not sclaun-
Irid.
2 Thei schulen make 30U with cute
jynagogis, but the our cometh, that ech
nan tliat slceth 30U, deme him silf for
:o 3yue sacrifice to God.
3 And thei schulen do to 30U thes
•>hinms, for thei han not knowc the
adir, nethir mo.
4 But thes thingis I spak to 30U, that
«rhaniie the our of hem schal come, 30
laue myndc, for I scidc to 30U.
I scidc

Chap. XVI.

i These thynges have
I sayde vnto you, be cause ye shulde
nott be hurte in youre fayth.

2 They shall exconumicat you, ye the
tyme shall come, thatt whosoever killeth
you, will thynkc that he doth God true
service.

3 And suchc thynges will they do vnto
you, be cause they have not knowen the
father, nctluT yet mc.

4 These thynges have I toldc you, that
wlicn that houre is come, ye shuldo
remember them, that I toldc you so.

;

;

6
4
2
;

;

538

GOTHIC, 360.

qa}>, unte mi}? "izwis was.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

]>'mg set fruman, fordam de ic wks mid
eow.''"

5 I}) nu gagga du jjamma sandyandin
mik, yah aiusliun us izwis ni fraihnij?
mik, Wlia)? gaggis 1

6 Akei unte {^ata rodida izwis, gauri]?a

gadaubida izwar hairto.

5 Nu ic fare to dam de me scnde, and
eower nan ne acsa]> me, Hwyder ic fare ]

6 Ac fordam de ic spraec das |)ing to

eow, unrotnys gefylde eowre heortan.

7 Akei ik sunya izwis qij^a, batizo 1st
izwis, ei ik galeij^au ; unte yabai ik ni
galei|?a, parakletus ni qimi]> at izwis ;
a]>]>an yabai gagga, sandya iua du izwis.

7 Ac ic eow secge sojjfuestnysse, eow
fremaj), dset ic fare ; gif ic ne fare, ne
cymj? se frefriend to eow ; witodlice gil
ic fare, ic hyne sende to eow.

8 Yah qimands is, gasakij? J)0 manasej)
bi frawaurht, yah bi garaihti)?a, yah bi
staua.

9 Bi frawaurht raihtis [^ata, Jjatei ni

galaubyand du mis

10 1|) bi garaihtijm, |>atei du attin mein-
amma gagga, yah ni ])anasei})S saiwhi]>
mik

11 I}> bi staua, jjatei sa reiks |)is fair-

whaus afdomi|)S war]?.

8 And donne he cym|>, he \>yw]> dysne
middan-eard be synne, and be rihtwis-
nesse, and be dome.

9 Be synne, fordam hi ne gelyfdon on

me

10 Be rihtw^snesse, fordam ic fare to

fyeder, and ge me ne geseoj?

11 Be dome, fordam dyses middan-

eardes ealdor ys gedemed.

12 Nauh ganoh slial qi|)an izwis, akei

1

Gyt ic hsebbe eow fela to secgenne.

ni magu}) frabairan *nu.

ac ge hyt ne magon mi acuman.

13 I|) J)an qimij) yains ahma sunyos,
briggi}) izwis in allai sunyai ; nih |)an
rodeij) af sis silbin, ak swa filu swe
rodei}> ; yah j^ata anawairjjo
hausei|?,

gateihijj izwis.

13 Donne dajre s6})f{estnysse g^st cymj),
he laerj) eow ealle
ne
spryc)? he of him sylfum, ac he spryc}:
da J)ing de he gehyrj) ; and cyj> eow da
J)ing de towearde synd.

s6})fcestnysse ;

14 Yains mik hauheij', unte us mein-

He me gcswutela|>, fordam he nimj;

1

ainma uimi)>, yah gateihij? izwis.

of minum, and cy}) eow.

15 All, 'patei aih atta, mein ist ; duh})e
qa)?, |>atei us meinamma nimi]?, yah ga-
teihi^ izwis.

16 Leitil nauh, yah ni saiwhij^ mik;
yali aftra leitil, yah gasaiwhijj mik, unte
ik gagga du attin.

17 paruli qe})un us ]>&\m siponyam du
sis niisso, Wha ist |)ata jjatei (]}]>'\\> unsis,
ni saiwhij> mik ; yah aftra
Leitil, ei
leitil, yah gasaiwhij) mik, yah |)atei ik
gagga du attin ]

18 Qe))unuh

|)ata, Wha siyai,
qi])i|>, Leitil 1 ni witum wha qij>i|>.

j'atei

15 Ealle da j'ing, de min fseder haefj),
dset he

synd mine ;
cwte}^,
nim)) of minum, and cyj) eow.^

fordig ic

1

Nu ymbe an lytel, ge me ne gescoj?
and eft ymbe lytel, ge me geseo|>, for-
dam de ic fare to fneder.

]

17 Da cwaedon hys leorning-cnihtas
him bctwynan, Hwa't ys dxt he us seg}',
Ymbe lytel, ge me ne geseo}? ; and ch
ymbe lytel, and ge me geseoj^, and di\!t
ic fare to feeder ]

18 Hig cweedon wTtodlfce, Hwnet ys,
diet he cwyj), Ymbe lytel 1 we uyton
hwiet he sprycj).

8
1

;

;
;

XVL 5-18.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

539

not to 30U tbes thingis fro the bigyn-
nyng, for I was with 30U.

5 And now I go to him that sente me,
and no man of 30U askith me, Whidur
thou goist 1

6 But for I haue spokyn to 50U thes
thingis, sorwe^ hath fulfiUid 30ure herte.

7 But I seie to 30U treuthe, it spedith
to 30U, that I go ; sothli il I schal not
go a wey, the coumfortour schal not
come to 30U ; forsoth if I schal go a
wey, I schal sende hym to 30U.

8 And whanne he schal come, he schal
reproue the world of synne, and of ri3t-
fulnesse, and of dom.

9 Forsothe oi synne, for thei han not

bileuyd in to me ;

These thynges sayde I not vKto you at
the begynnynge, be cause I was present
with you.
5 Butt nowe goo I my waye to hym
thatt sent me, and none of you axeth
me. Whither goest thou ?

6 But be cause I have sayde suche
thynges vnto you, youre hertes are full
off sorowe.

7 Neverthelesse 1 tell you the trueth,
it is expedient for you, that I goo a
waye ; tor yf I goo nott awaye, that
comforter will nott come vnto you ; yff
I de parte, I will sende hym vnto you.

8 And when he is come, he will rebuke
the worlde off synne, and of rightwesnes,
and of iudgement.

9 Of synne, because they beleve not

on me

10 Forsothe of ri3tfulnesse, for I go to
the fadir, and now 3e schulen not se me ;

10 Of rightwesnes, be cause I goo to
my father, and ye shall se me no moare

11 Forsothe of dom, for the prince of

this world is now demyd.

12 3it I haue many thingis for to seie

to 30U, but 3e mown not bere now.

13 Sotheli whanne the ilke spirit of
treuthe schal come, he schal teche 50U
sothli he schal not speke
al treuthe ;
of him self, but what euere thingis he
Bchal heere, he schal speke ; and he
schal telle to 30U the thingis that ben
to comynge.

14 He schal clarifie me, for of myne

be schal take, and schal telle to 30U.

15 Alle thingis, what euere thingis the
fadir hath, ben myne ; therfore I seide
to 30U, f(jr of myne he schal take, and
Bchal telle to 30U.

16 A litil, and now 30 schulen not se
me ; and eft a litil, and 36 schulen se
me, for I go to the fadir.

17

Tiicrfore summe of his discipHs
seidcn to gidere. What is tliis thing that
he seith to vs, A litil, and 30 schulen
not 86 me ; and eft a litil, and 3c schulen
Be me, for I go to the fader*?

18 Therfore thei seidcn, What is this,
tliat he seith to vs, A litel ? we witcn
not what he spckith.

)I1

1

And of iudgement, be cause the
chefe rueler of this worlde is iudged
alredy.

12 I have yet many thynges to saye
vnto you, but ye cannot beare them
awaye nowe.

13 When he is wons come, I meane
the sprete of verite, he will leade you
into all trueth ; he shall nott speake of
hym silfe, but whatsoever he shall heare,
that shall he speake ; and he will shewe
you thynges to come.

14 He shall glorify me, for he shall re-
ceave of myne, and shall shewe vnto you.
15 All thynges, that my father hath,
ar myne ; therfore sayd I vnto you, that
he shal take of mine, and shewe vnto
you.

16 After a whyle, ye shall nott se me

and agayne after a whyle, ye shall se
me, for I goo to my father.

17 Then sayd some of his disciples
bitwene them selves. What is this that
he sayth vnto vs, After a whyle, ye shall
not se me ; and agayne after awhylc, yo
shall se me, and that I goo to my father?
They sayde therfore, What is this,
that lie sayth. After a while'? we cannot
tell what he saith.

1

;

;

540

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

19 i}) icsus wissiih, |)atei wildcclim ina
fraihiian, yah qajj
iin, Bi })ata sokei]?
mi]? izwis misso, j^atei qa[), Leitil, yah
ni saiwlii}? mik ; yah aftra leitil, yah
gasaiwhij? mik.

19 Se Hselend wiste, dset hi woldon
hyne acsian, and he cwse]) to him, Be
dam ge smeagea]? betwynan eow, fordam
ic ssede, Ymbe lytel, ge me ne geseof)
and eft ymbe lytel, ge me geseo}^.

20 Amen, amen, qij^a "izwis, j^ei grcitl|?

yah gauno|> yus, 'i\> manase)-/S faginoj?
yus saurj^andans wair[)i|?, akei so saurga
izwara du fahedai wair})ij).

20 So}), ic eow secge, daet ge heofia})
and wepa}), middan-eard geblissa]> ; and
ge beo]) unrote, ac eower unrotnys by])
gewend to gefean.

21 Qino j)an bam]?, sam'ga habaid, unte
qam wheila izos ;
i]> bijje gabauran ist
barn, ni ))anasei})S ni gaman |)izos aglons,
gabaurans war])
unte
faura
manna 'in fairwhau.

fahedai,

21 Da}nne wif cen]), hco hjef[) unrot-
nysse, fordam de hyre tid com ; donne
heo cen}) cnapan, ne geman heo daere
hefinysse, for gefean, fordam man by])
acenned on middan-eard.

22 Yah ])an yus auk nu saurga habai]?,
i\> aftra saiwha izwis, yah faginoj) i'zwar
hairto, yah ])0 fahed izwara ni ainshun
nimi]? af izwis.

23 Yah in yainamma daga mik ni
frailmi}? waihtais ; amen, amen, qij)a iz-
wis, ])atei ])iswhah ]>ei bidyi]? attan in
namin meinamma, gibi}? izwis.

24 Und hita ni bedu]? ni waihtais in
bidj'ai}), yah nimij),

namin meinamma ;
ei fahef>s izwara siyai usfullida.

25 pata in gayukom rodida izwis ;
akei qimi}? wheila, ])anuh izwis ni ])an-
asei])S in gayukom rodya, ak andaugiba
bi attan gateiha izwis.

22 And witodlice ge habba]) nu unrot-
nysse, eft ic eow geseo, and eower heorte
geblissaj), and nan man ne nim]) eowerne
gefean fram eow.

23 And on dam dsege ge ne bidda}) me
nanes ])inges ;''' so]), ic eow secge, gif ge
hwset bidda]) minne freder on minuni
naman, he hyt syl}) eow.

24 Od dis ne bivde ge nan ])ing on
minum naman j bidda}), and ge under-
foj), dset eower gefea sy full.

25 Das \>ing ic eow ssede on bigspel-
lum ; seo tid cym}), donne ic eow ne
sprece on bigspellum, ac ic cyde eow
oj^enlice be minum fseder.

26 In yainamma daga in namin mein-
amma bidyi}) ; yah ni qi]>a izwis, ])ei ik
bidyau attan bi izwis ;

27 Ak silba atta friyo]? izwis, unte yus
mik friyodedu]?, yah galaubidedu]), ])atei
ik fram Gu|>a urrann.

28 Uzuhiddya fram attin, yah atiddya
aftra bileil)a ]>amnia

in J^ana fairwhu ;
fairwhau, yah gagga du attin.

29 ])aruh qe]7un |)ai siponyos is, Sai !
nu andaugiba rodcis, yah gayukono ni
ainohun qijns.
30 Nu witum, ei ]>u kant alia ; yah ni
]>arft, ei }'uk whas fraihnai.
Bi J)amma
galaubyam, ])atci ])U fram Gu])a urrant.

31 Andhof im lesus, Nu galaubeij>.

26 On dam diege ge bidda}) on minum
naman ; and ic eow ne secge, fordam ic
bidde minne fneder be eow ;

27 Witodlice se faeder cow lufa}>, for-
dam de ge lufedon me, and gelyfdou,
dset ic com of Gode.

28 Ic for fram fteder, and com on mid-
eft ic forlcete middau-card,

dan-eard ;
and fare to faeder.

29 His leorning-cnihtas cw?edon to
dii s{)rycst opeulice, and ne

him, Nu !
segst nan bigspell.
30 Nu we witon, da?t du wiist ealle
])ing ; and de nis nai })earf, dnet acnig
On dysum we gelyfa]), daet
de acsige.
du come of Gode.

31 Se Hselend him andswarode and

cwsej), Nu ge gclyfa]).

9

;

1

XVI. 19-31.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

541

1

Forsotlie Jhesu knew, for tliei wold-
en axe him, and he seide to hem, Of
this thing ^e seken a raong 50U, for I
seide, A litil, and ^e schulen not se me
and eft a litel, and 50 schulen se me.

20 Treuli, treuli, I seye to 50U, for i^e
schulen morne and wepe, forsothe the
world schal enioye ; forsothe ^e schulen
be sorwful, but 5oure sorwe schal turne
in to ioye.

21 Sothly a womman whanne sche
berith child, hath sorwe, for hir our
forsothe whanne sche hath
Cometh ;
borun a sone, now sche thenkith not on
the pressure,"*" for ioye, for a man is
borun in to the world.

22 And therfore ^e han now sorwe,
sothli eft I schal se 50U, and 5oure herte
schal enioye, and no man schal take fro
30U 30ure ioye.

23 And in that day 56 schulen not axe
me ony thing ; treuli, treuli, I seie to
50U, if 3e schulen axe the fadir ony
thing in my name, he schal ^yue to 50U.
24 Til now ^e axiden not ony thing in
my name ; axe ^e, and 3e schulen take,
that 30ure ioye be ful.

25 I haue spokun to 30U thes thingis
in prouerbis ;^ the our cometh, whanne
now I schal not speke to 50U in pro-
uerbis, but opynly of my fadir I schal
telle to 30U.

26 In that day 36 schulen axe in my
name ; and I seie not to 30U, for I schal
preye the fadir for 30U ;

27 Forsothe he the fadir loueth 30U, for
3e han loued me, and han bileuyd, for I
wente out fro God.

28 I wente out fro the fadir, and I
cam in to the world ; eftsoones I leeue
the world, and I go to the fadir.

29 His disciplis seyen to him, Lo !
now thou spekist oi)ynli, and thou seist
no prouerbe.

30 Now we witen, for thou wost alle
thingis ; and it is no nede to tliec, that
ony man axe thee.
In this thing we
bilouen, for thou wentist out fro God.

31 Jlicsu answcridc to hem. Now 3c

19 Jesus perceaved, that they wolde
axe hym, and sayde vnto them. This is
it that ye enquyre of bitwene youre
selves, that I sayd. After a whyle, ye
shall nott se me ; and agayne after a
whyle, ye shall se me.

20 Verely, verely, I saye vnto you, ye
shall wepe and lament, and the worlde
shall reioyce ; ye shall sorowe, but youre
sorowe shalbe tourned to ioye.

21 A woman when she traveyleth,
hath sorowe, be cause her houre is come ;
but as sone as she is delivered off her
chylde, she remembreth no moare her
anguysshe, for ioye, that a man is borne
in to the worlde.

22 And ye nowe are in sorowe, butt I
will se you agayne, and youre hertes
shall reioyce, and youre ioye shall no
man take from you.

23 And in that daye shall ye axe me
no question ; verely, verely, I saye vnto
you, whatsoever ye shall axe the father
in my name, he will geve it you.

24 Hetherto have ye axed no thinge
in my name ; axe, and ye shall receave
it, that youre ioye maye be full.

25 These thinges have I spoken vnto
you in proverbes ; the tyme will come,
when I shall no moare spake to you in
proverbes, but I shall shewe you playnly
from my father.

26 At that daye shall ye axe in myne
name ; and I saye not vnto you, that I
will speake vnto my father for you ;

27 For my father hym silfe loveth you,
be cause ye have loved me, and beleved,
that I cam out from God.

28 I went out from the father, and
cam into the worlde ; I leve the worlde
agayne, and go to the father.

29 His disciples sayd vnto hym, Loo !
nowe speakest thou playnly, and thou
vsest no provorbe.

30 Nowe knowe we, that thou vndcr-
stondcst all thinges ; and ncdcst not,
that eny man shulde axe the cny (ques-
Therfore bclcve we, that thou
tion.
camst from God.

Jesus answered them, Nowe ye do

3

bileucn.

bclcve.

542

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

32 Sai ! qimi)? wlieila, yah nu qam, ei
distahyada, wharyizuh du seina, yali
mik ainana bilei|?i})
; yah ni im aius,
unte atta mi]? mis ist.

3 2 Nu ! com tid, and cymj>, dret ge to-
faron, scghwylc to his agenum, and for-
lacton me anne ; and ic ne eom ana,
fordam min fseder is mid me.

33 pata rodida i'zwis, [e'l in mis ga-
\vair|)i aigei|> ; in jmnima fairwliau aglons
hal)aid, akei |?rafstei]j izwis, ik gayiuk-
aida jjana fairwhu.

ic eow ssedc,

33 Das |)ing

ct?et ge
habbon sibbe on me ; ge habbaj) hefige
byrdene on middan-earde, ac getruwia)?,
ic ofer-swidde middan-eard.

Chap. XVII.

i pata rodida lesus,
uzuhhof augona seina du himina, yah
qa)?, Atta, qam wheila, hauliei jjeinana
sunu, ei sunus j^eins hauhyai ))uk.

2 Swaswe atgaft 'imma waldufni allaize
leike, ei all j^atei atgaft imma, gibai 'im
libain aiweinon.

Chap. XVIL ""^i Das |>ing se Hselend
sprsec, and ahof up his eagan to heof-
enum, and cwaej), Fseder, tid ys cumen,
geswiitela dinne sunu, da3t din sunu ge-
swutelige de.

2 And swa du him scaldest anweald
cvlces mannes, diet he sylle ece lif callum
dam, de dii him sealdest.

3 Soil |)an 1st so aiweino libains, ei
kunneina jjuk ainana sunya Guj?, yah
])anei insandides, lesu Christu.

4 Ik jnik hauliida ana air})ai, waurstw

ustauh, J^atei atgaft mis du waurkyan.

5 Yah nu, hauhei mik |)U, atta, at Jjus
silbin, |)anima wul))au jianei habaida at
J)us, faurj}izei sa fairwhus wesi.

3 Dis ys s6]?lice ece lif, dset hi oncnawon
dset dii eart dn s6[) God, and se de du
sendest, Hselend Crist.

4 Ic de geswiitelocle ofer eorjjan, ic ge-
endode daet weorc, dset dii me sealdest
to donne.

5 And nu, du feeder, gebeorhta me mid
de sylfum, da^re beorhtnysse de ic hiefde
myd de, serdam de middan-eard wscre.

6 Gabairhtida jjeinata namo mannam,
J)anzei atgaft mis us )?amma fairwhau ;
|)einai wesun, yah mis atgaft ins, yah
]?ata waurd })einata gafastaidedun.

6 Ic efeswiitelode dinne nanian dam
maniium, de du me sealdest of middan-
earde ; hig Avseron dine, and dii hi seald-
est me, and hi geheoldon dine sprsece.

7 Nu ufkunjja, ei alia ])oei atgaft mis,
at |)us si lid.

7 Nu hi gecneowon, daet ealle da ])ing
de du me sealdest, synd of de.

8 Unte ]?o waurda jjoei atgaft mis,
atgaf im ; yah eis nemun bi sunyai,
l^ntei fram jnis urrann ; yah galaubi-
dedun, Jjatei |>u mik insandides.

8 Fordam ic sealde him da word, de dii
scaldest me ; and hig underfengon, and
oncnoowon sojjlice, da^t ic com of dc ;
and hig gelyfdon, diet dii me sendest.

9 Ik bi ins bidya, ni bi |)0 manasc))
j)aiizei atgaft mis,

))ans,

bidya, ak bi
unte |)einai sind.

10 Yah mcina alia |)eina sind, yah |)eina

mcina ; yah hauhijjs im in |)aiiu.

11 Ni |>anasei)js 'im 'in jjamnia fairwhau,

9 Ic bidde for hig, ne bidde ic for mid-
dan-earde, ac for da, de dii me scaldest,
fordam hi synd dine.

10 And ealle mine synd dine, and dine
synd mine ; and ic eom gcswiitelod on
hini.^

J I And uii ic ne eom^ on middan-

XVI. 32.-XVIL 1 1.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

543

32 Lo ! the our cometh, and now it
Cometh, that ^e be clisparplid,^ ech in to
his owne thingis, and leeue me aloone ;
and I am not aloone, for the fadir is
with me.

33 Thes thingis I haue spokun to 50U,
that 5e haue pees in me ; in the world
56 schulen haue pressing,^ but triste ^e,
I haue ouercome the world.

32 Beholde ! the houre draweth nye,
and ys alredy come, that ye shalbe
scatered, every man his wayes, and shall
leave me alone ; and yet am I not alone,
for my father is with me.

33 These wordes have I spoken vnto
you, that in me ye myght have peace ;
in the worlde shall ye have tribulacion,
but be of good cheare, I have overcome
the worlde.

Chap. XYII.

i Jhesu spak thes
tbingis, and the y^en lift vp in to he-
uene, he seide, Fadir, the our cometh,
clarifie tlii sone, that thi sone clarifie
thee.

2 As thou hast ^ouun to him power of
ech fleisch,'*' that al thing that thou hast
5ouun to hym, he 3yue to hem euerlast-
ing lyf.

3 Forsothe this is euerlasting lyf, that
thei knowe thee aloone verry God, and
whom thou sentist, Jhesu Crist.

4 I haue clarifyed thee on erthe, I
haue endid the werk, that thou hast
50uun to me, that I do.

5 And now, fadir, clarifie thou me at
thi silf, with clerenesse that I hadde at
thee, bifore the world was maad.

6 I haue schewid thi name to the men,
whiclie thou hast ^ouun to me of the
world ; thei weren thine, and thou hast
50uun hem to me, and thei ban kept thi
word.

7 And now thei ban knowun, for alle
thingis that thou hast jouun to me, ben"
of thee.

8 For the wordis that thou hast 30uun
to me, I 5af to hem ; and tliei ban
takun, and ban knowun verili, for I
wente out fro thee ; and thei bileuyden,
for thou sentist me,

9 I prcie for hem, not for the world,
but for hem, that thou hast ^ouun to
me, for thei })cn thine.

10 And alio myne thingis ben thine,
and thin thingis ben myne ; and i. am
clarified in hem.

11 And now I am not in the world,

Chap. XVII.

1 These wordes spake
Jesus, and lifte vppe his eyes to heven,
and sayde. Father, the houre is come,
glorify thy sonne, that thy soune maye
glorify the.

2 As thou hast geven hym power over
all fleshe, that he shulde geve eternall
life, to as many as thou hast geven him.

3 This is life eternall, that they myght
knowe the that only very God, and
whom thou hast sent, Jesus Christ.

4 I have gloryfied the on the erth, I
have fynyssheecl the workes, whych thou
gavest me to do.

5 And nowe, glorify me thou, father,
in thyn awne presence, with the glory
which I had with the, yerre the worlde
was.

6 I have declared thy name vnto the
men, whych thou gavest me out off the
worlde ; thyne they were, and thou hast
geven them me, and they have kept thy
sayinges.

7 Nowe have they knowen, that all
thinges whatsoever thou hast geven me,
are of the.

8 For I have geven vnto them the
wordes, which thou gavest me ; and they
have rcceaved them, and have knowen
surely, that I cam out from the ; and
have beloved, that thou diddcst send me.
9 I praye for them, I praye not for the
worlde, but for them, which thou hast
geven me, for they are thyne.

10 And all myne are thyiic, and thyne
arc myne ; and I am glorifyed in thcni.

11 And now am I no moare in the

;

;

544

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

i|> })ai in |)amma fairwhau siiid, yah ik
du })us gagga.
Atta weiha, fastai iu9 in
namin jjcinamnia, jjanzei atgaft mis, ei
siyaiua ain, swaswe wit.

earde, and hi synd on middan-earde,
and ic cume to de.^
Halega^ foeder,
heald on dinum naman, doet dii me
sealdest, dcet hi syn an, swil wyt synd."""

12 pan was mijj ira in J^amma fair-
whau, ik fastaida ins in namin |:einam-
ma ;
juinzci atgaft mis, gafastaida, yah
ainshun us im ni fraqistnoda, niba sa
sunus fralustais, ei Jjata gamelido usfuUij)
waurj'i.

13 1}? nu du ])us gagga, yah |)ata rodya
in manasedai, ei habaina fabed meina
usfuUida in sis.

14 Ik atgaf im waurd j:einata, yah so
manase|)S fiyaida ins ; unte ni sind us
jjamma fairwhau, swaswe ik us j^amma
fairwhau ni im.

15 Ni bidya, ei usnimais ins us ]iamma
fairwhau, ak ei bairgais im faura j^amma
unselyin.

16 Us )>amma fairwhau ni sind, swaswe

12 Da ic wses mid him, ic heold hi on
ic heold da do du me
dinum naman ;
seaklest, and ne forwear)? hyra nan, buton
forspillednysse beam, daet dast halige
gewrit sy gefylled.

13 Nu ic cume to de, and d's j?iug ic
sprece on middan-earde, dset hi habbon
minne gefean gefylledne on him sylfum.
14 Ic -sealde him dine sprsece, and
middan-eard hi hsefde on hatunge ; for-
dam hi ne synd of middan-earde, swu ic
eac ne com of middan-earde.

15 Ne bidde ic, dset du hi nyme of
middan-earde, ac da^t dii hi gehealde
of yfele.

16 Ne synd bi of middan-earde, swa ic

ik us l^amma fairwhau ni 'im.

ne eom of middan-earde,

17 Weihaiins in sunyai ; waurd |)einata

17 Gehalga him sojjfsestnysse ;

din

sunya ist.

sprsec ys scj)f8estnys.

18 Swaswe mik insandides in manasej>,

18 Swa dii me sendest on middan-eard,

swah ik insandida ins in J^o manased.

ic sende hi on middan-eard.

19 Yah fram "im ik weiha mik silban,

ei siyaina yah eis weihai in sunyai.

20 A})]; an ni bi j^ans bidya ainans, ak
bi ]?ans galaubyandaus J>airh waurda ize
du mis ;

21 Ei allai ain siyaina, swaswe ]>u, atta,
in mis, yah ik in ))us,
ei yah \ysa in
uggkis ain siyaina ; ei so manasejjs ga-
laubyai, jjatei [)U mik insandides.

22 Yah ik w^uljm |>anei gaft mis, gaf

im, ei siyaina ain, swaswe wit ain siyu

19 And for big ic halgige me sylfue,
dset big syn eac gehalgode on sojjfaest-
nysse.

2cf Witodlice ne gebidde ic for hi ane,
ac eac for da de gyt sceolon gelyfan
Jjuih hyra word on me ;

21 Dset ealle syn an, swa'du, fsedei",
eart on me, and ic on de, diet big syn
eac an on unc ; da^t middan-eard gelyfe,
dast du me sendest.

22 And ic scahle him da beorhtnysse,
de dii me sealdest, diet hi syn an, swa
wyt syn an

23 Ik in 'im, yali ]m in mis, ei siyaina
ustauhanai du ainamma ; yah kunnei so
manase))s, ]>atei j>u mik insandides, yah
friyodes ins, swaswe mik friyodes.

23 Ic eom on him, and dii eart on
me, diet hi syn ge-endode on an ; dxt
middan-eard oncnawe,da>t dii me sendest,
and lufodest big, swa dii me lufodest.

24 Atta, jjatci atgaft mis, wilyau ei
])arci im ik, yah j^ai siyaina mi}> mis, ei
saiwhaina wiilju meinana, {mnei
gaft
mis ; unte fiiyodcs mik faur gaskaft

24 Fa?der, ic wylle djrt da de du me
sealdest, syn mid me dar ic eom, da?t
hiir ffcseon mine beorhtnysse, de dii me
seaklest ; fordam du lufodest me ser

7

6
7
1

XVIL 12-24.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

545

and thes ben in the world, and I come
Hooli fadir, kepe hem in thy
to thee.
name, whiche thou hast 50uun to me,
that thei be oon, as and we.

12 "Whanne I was with hem, I kepte
hem in thi name ; whiche thou hast
5ouun to me, I kepte, and no man of
hem perischide, no but the sone of per-
dicioun,"*" that the scripture be fillid.

13 Forsothe now I come to thee, and
I speke thes thingis in the world, that
thei haue my ioye fillid in hem silf.

14 I ^af to hem thi word, and the
world hadde hem in hate ; for thei ben
not of the world, as and I am not of the
world.

15 I preie not, that thou take a wey
hem fro the world, but that thou kepe
hem fi'o yuel.

16 Thei ben not of the world, as and

I am not of the world.

worlde, but they are in the worlde, and
Wholy father, kepe in
I come to the.
thyne awne name, them which thou hast
geven me, that they maye be one, as we
are.

12 Whyll I was with them in the

worlde, I kepte them in thy name
those that thou gavest me, have I kepte,
and none of them is lost, but that lost
scripture myght be
chylde, that the

fulfilled.

13 Nowe come I to the, and these
wordes speake I in the worlde, that
they myght have my ioye full in them.

14 I have geven them thy doctryne,
and the worlde hath hated them ; be-
cause they are nott
ofi" the worlde,
even as I am not of the worlde.

15 I des)Te not, that thou shuldest
take them out of the worlde, but that
thou kepe them from evyll.

1

They are not ofi" the worlde, as I am

not of the worlde.

Halwe thou hem in treuthe ;

thi

1

Sanctify them in thy trueth ; thy

1

word is treuthe.

18 As thou sentist me in to the world,

and I sente hem in to the world.

19 And I halwe my silf for hem, that

and thei be hahvid in treuthe.

20 Sotheli I preie not oonli for hem,
but and for hem that ben to bileuynge
in to me bi the word of hem ;

21 That alle thei be oon, as thou, fadir,
in me, and I in thee, that and thei in
vs be oon ; that the worlc^ bileue, for
thou hast sent me.

22 And I haue ^ouun to hem the
hast 30uun to
clerenesse,
me, that thei be oon, as and we ben
oon ;

tliou

that

23 I in hem, and tliou in me, that thei
be endid in oon ; and that the world
knowc, that thou sentist me, and hast
louyd hem, as thou hast louyd and me.

sayinge is verite.

18 As thou diddest send me into the
worlde, even soo have I sent them into
the worlde.
19 And for their sakes sanctify I my
silfe, thatt they also myght be sanctified
thorowe the trueth.

20 I praye not for them alone, butt
for them also which shall beleve on me
thorowe their preachynge ;

2

That they all maye be one, as thou,
father, arte in me, and I in the, that
they maye be alsoo one in vs ; that the
worlde maye beleve, that thou hast sent
me.

22 And that glory that thou gavest
me, I have geven them, that they maye
be wone, as we are wone :

23 I am in them, and thou arte in me,
that they maye be made ])erfecte in
won ; and that the worlde maye knowe,
that thou hast sent me, and hast loved
tliem, as tliou hast loved mc.

24 Fadir, I wole that and thei whiche
liast 3ouun to me, be with me
tliou
wliere I am, tliat thei se my cleernessc,
that thou liast 30uun to mc ; for thou

24 Father, I will that they which thou
liast geven me, be with me where I am,
that they maye se my glory, which thou
! hast geven mc ; for thou hast loved mo

N 11

54G

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

fairwliaus.

middan-eard gcset wsere.

25 Atta garaihta, yah so manase]?s ]>uk
ni ufkunjja, i|> ik j^uk kun}?a, yah ]?ai
ufkunj>edun, ];atei \>u mik insandides.

25 La rihtwisa faeder, middan-eard de
ne gecneow, witodliee ic de gecneow,
and hi oncneowon, da^t dii me sendest.

26 Yah gakannida 'im namo jjeinata,
ei fria}?wa j^oei friyodes

yah kannya ;
mik, in im siyai, yah ik in im.

26 And ic him cydde dinne naman,
and gyt wylle cydan ; daet seo lufu de
dii me lufodest, sy on him, and ic com
on him.

Chap. XVIII.

i pata qijjands lesus,
usiddya mi|> siponyam seinaim
ufar
rinnon |?o Kaidron, })arei was aurtigards,
in j?anei galai]? lesus, yah siponyos is.

2 Wissuh )>an yah ludas, sa galewyands
ina, l^ana stad, jjatei ufta gaiddya lesus
yainar mi]? siponyam seinaim.

3 I|) ludas nam hansa, yah |)ize gudyane
yah Fareisaie andbahtans, iddyuh yaind-
Avair[)S mij) skeimam, yah haizam, yah
wepnam.

4 Ij) lesus witands alia

jjoei qemun
ana ina, usgaggands ut, qaj) im, Whana
sokeij? 1

5 Andhafyandans imma qe|)un, lesu
])ana Nazoraiu. paruh qa)j im lesus, Ik
Sto|)uh })an yah ludas, sa lewyands
im.
ina, mijj im.

6 paruh swe qaj) im, patei ik im, ga-

li])un ibukai, yah gadrusun dala]>.

7 pa})roh |)an ins aftra frah, Whana
I]) eis qe))un, lesu j>ana Nazo-

sokei]) ?

raiu.

8 Andhof lesus, qa)) izwis, |)atei ik im ;
yahai nu mik sokei|), letij? j^ans gaggan.

9 Ei usfullnodedi jmta waurd ]>atei qa]>,
Ei panzei atgaf mis, ni fraqistida ize
ainummehnn.

10 i\) Scimon Paitrus habands hairu,
uslauk ina, yah si oh jjis auhumistins
gu(lyins skalk, yah afmaimait imma auso
Sah j^an haitans was naniin
tiiihswo.
Malkus.

Chap. XVIII. +1 Da se Hs^lend das
|?ing cwsej?, da code he ... . ofer da
burnan Cedron, dser wses an wyrt-tun,
in to dam he code, and his leorning-
cnihtas.

2 Witodliee ludas, de hyne belsewde,
wiste da stowe, fordam de se Hselend
oft-raedlice com d3^der mid his leorning-
cnihtum.
3 Da underfeng ludas dset folc, and da
jjegnas a^t dam bisceopum and £ct dam
Phariseon, and com dyder mid leoht-
fatum, and mid blusura, and mid wsepn-
um.

4 Witodliee se Heclend wiste ealle da
J>ing de him towearde wseron, he code
da for]?, and cwae]? to him, Hwfene sece

5 Hig andswarodon him and cwsedon.
Se Hsel-
S6|)lice ludas

Done Nazareniscan Hselend.
end cwa']), Ic hit eom.
de hine belsewde, stod mid him.

6 Da he openlice ssede, Ic hit eom, da
eodon hig underbsec, and feollon on da
eorjjan.

7 Eft he 111 acsode, Hwsene sece ge 1
Hi cwsedon. Done Nazareniscan Ha-lcnd.

8 Se Hselend him andswarode, Ic ssede
eow, diet ic hit eom ; gif ge witodliee
me seca]>, Iseta}) das fiiran.

9 Dtot seo sprsec ware gefylled de he
cwse]), Da}t ic nanne dajra ne forspille,
de dii me scaldest.

10 Witodliee Simon Petrus ateah his
sweord, and sloh does bisceopcs |>cowan,
and acearf him of da-t swydre eare.
Dxs bcowan nama wa}S Malchus.

XVII. 25.-XVIII. 10.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

547

louedist me bifor the makinge of the
world.

25 Ri5tful fadir, the world knew not
thee, forsothe I knew thee, and thes
knowen, for thou sentist me.

26 And I haue m^ad thi name knowe
to hem, and schal make knowe ; that
the loue by which thou hast loued me,
be in hem, and I in hem.

before the makynge of the worlde.

25 O righteous father, the very worlde
hath nott knowen the, butt I have
knowen the, and these have knowen,
that thou hast sent me.

26 And I have declared vnto them thy
name, and will declare it ; that the love
wher with thou lovedst me, be in them,
and that I be in them.

Chap. XVIII.

i Whanne Jhesu
liadde seid thes thingis, he wente out
with his disciplis ouer the strond of
Cedron, where was a ^erd,"*" in to which
he entride, and his disciplis.

2 Sothli and Judas, that bitraiede him,
wiste the place, for ofte Jhesu cam to
gidere thidur with his disciplis.

Chap. XVIII.

i When Jesus had
spoken these wordes, he went forth with
his disciples over the broke Cedron,
where was a garden, into the which he
eutred, with his disciples.

2 Judas also, wich betrayed hym, knewe
the place, for Jesus often tymes resorted
thither with his disciples.

3 Therfore whanne Judas hadde takun
a cumpany' of
the
bischopis and Pharisees mynystris, he
cam with lanternis, and brondis, and
armys.

kni3tis, and of

4 And so Jhesu witino^e alle thinjjis
that weren to comynge on him, wente
forth, and seith to hem. Whom seken

3 Judas then after he had receaved a
bonde off men, and ministers of the hy
prestes and of the Pharises, cam thither
with lanterns, and fyerbrondes, and we-
pens.

4 Then Jesus knowynge all thynges
that shulde come on hym, went forth,
and sayde vnto them, Whom seke ye 1

5 Thei answeriden to him, Jhesu of
Jhesu seith to hem, I am.
Nazareth,
Forsoth and Judas that bitrayede hym,
stood with hem.

6 Therfore as he seide to hem, I am,
thei wenten a bak, and felden doun in
to erthe.
7 Eft lie axide hem. Whom seken ^e 1
Forsoth thei seiden, Jhesu Nazaren.

5 They answered hym, Jesus off Naza-
Jesus sayde vnto them, I am he.
reth.
Judas also which betrayed him, stode by
with them.

6 As sone as he had sayd vnto them, I
am he, they went backe wardes, and fell
to the grounde.
7 He axed them agayne, Whome seke
ye 1

They sayde, Jesus off Nazareth.

8 He answeride to hem, I seide to 50U,
for I am ; therfore if 3c seken me, suff're
30 tlies to go a wey.

9 That the word which he seide schulde
bo fillid, For T loste not ony of hem,
whiclie thou hast 30uun to me.

I

10 Forsothe Symount Petrc hauynge a
swcrd, (lrou3 it out, and sinot the scr-
uaunt of the biscliop, and kittc of his
Forsotlie the name of
litil ri3t cere.
the seruauut was Malkus.

8 Jesus answered, I sayde vnto you, I
am he ; iff ye seke me, Ictt these goo
theyr waye.

9 That the sayingc myght be fulfilled
which he spake. Of them which thou
gavest, have I not lost one.

10 Simon Peter had a swcardc, and
druc hym out, and smote tlic hye j)restcs
Rcrvaunt, and cut off his
i-iglit. care.
Tiic servauntcs name was Malcluis.

N n 2

9
3
8
5
7

;
;

1
1

;

548

GOTHIC, 360.

*

II paruli qa|) lesus du Paitrau, Lagei
Jjana hairu in fodr ; stikl ])anei gaf mis
atta, niu drigkau j^ana 1

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.
Da cwsej) se Hselend to Petre, Do
din sweord on his scaejje ; done cahc de
min faeder me sealde, ne drince ic hine ?

[St. John

1

12 paruh hansa, yah sa ]>usundifa|)S,
yah andbalitos ludaie, undgripun lesu,
yah gabundim ina,

1

Yah gatauhun 'ina du Annin frumist
sa was auk swaihra Kayafin, saei was
auhuinists weiha |)is ata^nyis.

12 Dset fole, and se ealdor, and dsera
ludea })egnas, namon done Haelend, and
bundon hine,

13 And laeddon hine serest to Annan;
se waes Caiphas sweor, and se Caiphas
wses dses geares bisceop.

14 Wasuh pan Kayafa, saei garaginoda
ludaium, jjatei batizo ist aiuana mannan
fraqistyan faur managein.

1

paruh laistida lesu Seimon Paitrus,
yah anjjar siponeis ; sah }>an siponeis
Yah tiu[)-
was kun|)S jjamma gudyin.
inngalaij) mijj lesua, in rohsn |)is gud-
yins ;

16 Ij) Paitrus sto]> at daurom uta.
paruh usiddya ut sa siponeis anjjar, saei
was kun|)s )?amma gudyin, yah qa]?
daurawardai, yah attauh inn Paitru.

14 Witodhee Caiphas dihte dam lu-
deon, and cwsej), dast hyt betere wsere
dset an man swulte for folce.

15 Simon Petrus fyligde dam Hselende,
and oder leorning-cniht ; se oder leorn-
ing-cniht wses dam bisceope cu|). And
he eode in mid dam Hselende, on dses
bisceopes cafer-tiin

16 Petrus stod set daere dura dser iite.
Da eode se leorning-cniht iit, de wses
dses bisceopes ciida, and cw£e}j to daeie
dure-}5inene, and Isedde Petrum in.

1

is

paruh qajj yaina |)iwi, so daur-
awardo, du Paitrau, Ibai yah \>u J)ize
qa|>, Ni
siponye is
im.

jjis mans 1

I]?

1

paruh sto))un skalkos yah andbahtos
haurya waurkyandans, unte kakl was,
yah warmidedun sik ; yah |>an was mij?
im Paitrus, standands yah warmyands
sik.

1]) sa auhumista gudya frah lesu bi

1

sii)onyans is, yah bi laisein is.

20 Audhof imma lesus, Ik andaugyo
rodida manasedai ; ik sinteino laisida in
gaqum}>ai, yah in gudhusa, |)arei sint-
eino ludaieis gaqimand, yah Jjiubyo ni
rodida waiht.

17 Da cw8e)> seo duru-|)Tnen to Petre,
Cwyst du, eart du of dyses leorniug-
cnihtum ] Da cwaej? he, Nic, ne eom

ic.

18 Da Jjeowas and da }?egnas stodon
set dam gledon, and w}Tmdon hig,
fordam hit was ceakl ; witodhee Petrus
stod mid him, and wyrmde hyne.

19 Se bisceop acsode done Haelend
ymbe his leorning-cnihtas, and ymbe his
lare.

openlice

Ic si)raec

20 Da andswarode se Haelend and
to middan-
cwtDJi,
earde ; and ic Iserde synde on gesam-
nunge, and on temple, doer ealle ludeas
toga^dere comon, and ic ne spreec nan
])ing digelice.

21 Whis mik fraihnis 1 fraihn J)ans

hausyandans, wba rodidedyau du im
sai !

J)ai witun, j^atei qu[) ik.

2

Hwi acsast du me 1 acsa dii de
gehyrdon, Invajt ic to him spraece ; hi
witon, da jjing de ic him sacde.

22 I|) |)ata qi))andin inima, sums and-
babte standands, gaf shih lofin lesua,
qajiuh, Swau andliafyis jnmnna reikistin
gudyin 1

23 Andhof Icsus, Yabai ubilaba rodida,
aijjj^au yabai

wcitwodci bi jnita ubil ;

22 Da he dis cwae)>, da sloh an daera
j)Cgna de dar stodon, done Hivlend mid
his handa, and cwaej), Andswarast dii
swa dam bisceope ?

23 Se Haelend andswarode him and
cyj) ge-

cwa?]), Gif ic

sprsece,

yfele

4
1

1
1

;

;

XVIII. 11-23,] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

549

1

Therfore Jhesu seide to Petre, Sencle
thou the swerd in to the schethe j wolt
thou not, that I drynke thilke cuppe,
that my fadir 3af to me ?

12 Therfore the eumpany of kny3tis,
and the tribune, and the mynysti-is of
Jewis, token Jhesu, and bounden him,

13 And ledden him first to Annas ;
sothli he was fadir of Cayphas wyf,
that was bischop of that 5eer.

1

Sothli it was Ca}^has, that ^af coun-
man

ceil to the Jewis, that it spedith
for to deie for the peple.

15 Therfore SymountPetre suede Jhesu,
and another disciple ; forsoth thilke dis-
ciple was knowun to the bischop. And
he entride yn with Jhesu, in to the
halle of the bischop ;

16 Sothly Petre stood at the dore
withoute forth.
Therfore the tothir dis-
ciple, that was knowun to the bischop,
wente out, and seide to the womman
kepinge the dore, and ledde yn Petre.

17 Therfore the handmayde, kepere of
the dore, seide to Petre, Wher and thou
art of the disciplis of this man ] He
seide, I am not.

18 Forsoth the seruauntis and mynys-
for it was
tris stooden at the colis,
eoold, and thei warmyden hem ; sothli
and Petre was with hem, stondinge and
warmynge him.

1

Then sayde Jesus vnto Peter, Put
vppe thy swearde into the sheath ; shall
I not drynke of the cuppe, which my
father had geven me 1

12 Then the company, and the cap-
tayne, and the ministers off the lewes,
toke Jesus, and bounde hym,

13 And ledde hym awaye to Anna
fyrst ; for he was fatherelawe vnto Cay-
phas, which was the hye preste thatt
same yeare.

14 Cayphas was he, that gave counsel!
to the lewes, that it was expedient that
won man shulde deye for the people.

disciple ;

15 Simon Peter folowed Jesus, and
disciple was
another
knowen of the hye preste. And went
in with Jesus, into the pallys off the
hye preste

that

16 Peter stode att the dore with outt.
Then wentt outt thatt other discijDle,
which was knowen vnto the hye preste,
and spake to the damsell thatt kept the
dore, and brought in Peter.

17 Then sayde the damsell, that kept
the dore, vnto Peter, Arte nott thou
wone off this mannes disciples 1 He
sayde, I am nott.

18 The servauntes and the ministers
stode there and had made a fyre off
coles, for it was colde, and they warmed
them selves ; Peter also stode amonge
them, and warmed hym silfe.

19 Therfore the bischop axide Jhesu

19 The hye preste axed Jesus of his

of his disciplis, and of his teching.

disciples, and of his doctrine.

20 Jhesu answeride to him, I haue
spokun opynly to the world ; I tau3te
euere in the synagoge, and in the temple,
whidur alle the Jems camen to gidere,
and in priuy I spak no thing.

20 Jesus answered hym, I spak openly
in the worlde : I ever taught in the
sinagoge, and in the temple, whither all
the lewes resorted, and in secrete have
I sayde nothyngc.

21 "Wliat axist thou me ^ axe hem that
herden, what I haue spokun to hem ;
thei witen, what thingis I haue
lo !

seyd,

22 Whanne he haddc seid thes tliingis,
oon of the mynystris stondingo ny3, ^af
a boffat to Jhesu, soyingc, Answerist
thou so to the byschop ]

23 Jhcfiu answeride to him. If I liauc
Bpokun jTiclc, berc thou witnessing of

2

Why axcst thou me 1 axe them
whiche hcrde me, what I sayde vnto
them ; bcholde ! they can tell, what I
sayde.

22 Wlicn he had thus spoken, one off
the ministers which stode by, smote
Jesus on the face, sayinge, Answrcst
thou the hye preste hoo 1

23 Jesus answered hym, Yf I have

evyll spoken, bearc witncs of the cvyll

550

GOTHIC, 360.

waila, duwbe mik slaliis 1

24 panuh insandida 'ina Annas ga-
Imndanana du Kayafin, j^amma maistin
gudyin.

25 it}) Seimon Paitrus was standands
|)aruh qejjun du
yah warmyands sik ;
imma, Niu yah \>u |?ize siponye J?is is?
I|) is afaiaik, yah qa)>, Ne, ni im.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

witnesse be yfele ; gif ic wel spr^ece,
hwi bcatst du me 1

24 Da sende Annas hine to .

. dam

bisceope, gebundenne.

25 And Symon Petrus stod and ^vyrm-
de hyne ; da cwaedon hi to liim, Cwyst
du, eart dii of his leorning-cnihtum ?
He wid-s5c, and cwse]?, Ic ne eom.

26 Qa]) sums ])\ze skalke jjis maistins
gudyins, sah ni|)yis was,
jjanimei af-
maimait Paitrus auso, Niu })uk sawh
ik in aurtigarda mi]> imma 1

26 Da cwjejj an daes bisceopes ])eowena,
hys cuda, d?es eare sloh Petrus of, Hu
ne geseah ic de on dam wyrt-tune mid
hym 1

27 paruh aftra afaiaik Paitrus, yah

27 Petrus da eft wid-soc, and sona se

suns hana hrukida.

cocc creow.

28 I{) eis tauhun lesu fram Kayafin,
j^anuh was maurgins, i|?
in praitoriaun ;
eis ni iddyedun in praitoria, ei ni bi-
saulnodedeina, ak matidedeina pascha.

28 Da gelseddon hi done Hselend to
Caiphan, on daet dom-ern ; hit wses da
morgen, and hi
sylfe ne eodon in to
dam dom-erne, dset hyg naeron besmit-
ene, ac daet hi seton hyra eastron.

29 paruh atiddya ut Peilatus du im,
yah qa]?, Who wrohe bairi^ ana Jiana
mannan ]

30 Andhofun, yah qe|>un du imma, Nih
wesi sa ubiltoyis, ni Jjau weis atgebeima
))us ina.

29 Da code Pilatus ut to him, and
cw8ej?, Hwylce wr5hte bringe ge ongean
dysne man 1

30 Hig andswaredon, and cweedon to
him, Gif he nsere yfel-dsede, ne sealde
we hine de.

31 paruh qajj im Peilatus, Nimi]> ina
yus, yah bi witoda izwaramma, stoyij?
1\> eis qe|)unuh du imma ludaieis,
ina.
Unsis ni skuld ist usqiman nianne ain-
ummehun ;

32 Ei waurd Frauyins usfulhiodedi,
qa|), bandwyand s whileikamma

J^^atei
dau|)au skuhla gaswiltan.

33 Galaij? in praitauria aftra Peilatus,
yah wopida lesu, qa})uh imma, pu is
|)iudans ludaie 1

31 Da cwsejj Pilatus to him, Nimaj>
hine, and dema|> him, be eowre se. Da
cwsedon da ludeas to him. Us nis alyfed
daet we aenigne man ofslean ;

32 D?et d^es Hselendes sprsec wsere
gefylled, de he cw.tjj, da he geswutelode
hwylcon deaj^e he swulte.
33 Da code Pilatus eft in to dam dom-
erne, and clypode done Hselend, and
cwjEJ? to him, Eart dii ludea cining ?

34 Andhof lesus, Abu |)us silbin ))U
j)us qej>un bi
)?ata
mik ?

anj>arai

qi|)is,

]>au

35 Andhof Peilatus, Waitci ik ludaius
im 1 So ))iu(la j^eina yah gudyans anafulh-
un }juk mis ; wha gatawides ?

36 Andhof Icsus, ])iudangardi mcina
nist us |)amma fairwliau ;
i|) us Jjamma
fairwliau wesi meina ))iudangardi, ai}>|iau
andbalitos meinai usdaudidedeina, ci ni

34 Da, andswarode se Ha^lcnd him,
and cw.t|>, Cwyst dii dis of de sylfum,
hwjvder de hyt de odre saedon 1

35 Pilatus him andswarode and cw^e}?,
Cwyst du, eom ic ludcisc ?
Din j)Cod.
and dine bisceopas de sealdon me ; hwaet
dydest du ?

36 Da cwrej) se Hselend, Min rice nys
of dysum middan-earde ;
gif min rice
wsere of dysum middan-earde, witodlice
mine j'cgnas fuhton, diet ic nsere geseald

XVIIl. 24-36.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

551

sotlili

if wel, wlii smytist thou

yuel ;
mel

24 And Annas sente liim boundun to

yf I have well spoken, why smytest thou
me"?

24 Annas sent hym bounde vnto Cay-

Cayfas, the bischop.

phas, the hye^preste.

25 Forsothe Symount Petre was stond-
ynge^and warmynge him ; therfore thei
seiden to him, Wher and thou art his
disciple 1 He denyede, and seyde, I am
not.

26 Oon of the bischopis seruauntis,
cosyn of hym, whos litel eere Petre
kittide of, seyde, Wher I sy^ not thee
in the gardyn with hym ?

25 Simon Peter stode and warmed hym
silfe ; and they sayde vnto hym, Arte
not thou also won of his disciples 1 He
denyed itt, and sayde, I am not.

26 Won of the servauntes of the hye
cosyn, whose eare Peter
preste,
smote of, sayde vnto hym, Did not I
se the in the garden with hym ]

his

27 Therfore eft Petre denyede, and

27 Peter denyed it agayne, and im-

a noon the koc crew.

28 Therfore thei leden Jhesu to Cay-
fas, in to the moot halle ; sothli it was
morwetyde, and thai entriden not in to
the moot halle, that thei schulden not
be defoylid, but that thei schulden ete
paske.

29 Therfore Pilat wente out with oute
forth to hem, and seide, What accusing
brynge ^e a5ens this man ?

30 Thei answeriden, and seiden to hym.
If this were not a mysdoer, we hadden
not bitakun hym to thee.

31 Therfore Pilat seith to hem, Take
5e him, and deme 5e him, vp 3oure lawe.
Therfore thei seyden to him. It is not
leefful to vs for to slee ony man ;

32 That the word of Jhesu schulde be
fillid, which he seide, signyfiynge bi what
deeth he was to deiynge.

33 Therfore eft Pilate entride in to
the moot halle, and clepide Jhesu, and
seide to him, Ert thou king of Jewis 1

34 Jhesu answeride, and seide to him,
Seist thou this thing of thi silf, ether
othere seiden to thee of me 1
35 Pilat answeride, Wher I am a Jew 1
Thi folk and bischopis bytokun thee to
me ; what liast thou don 1

36 Jhesu answeride, My kyngdom is
not of tliis world ; if my kyngdom were
sotlily my mynystris
of
schulden stryuc, that I schulde not be

world,

this

mediatly the cocke crewe.

28 Then ledd they Jesus from Cayphas,
into the housse of iudgement ; hit was
in the mornynge, and they them selves
went not into the iudgement housse,
lest they shulde be defyled, butt that
they myght eate pascha.

29 Pilate then went oute vnto them,
and sayde. What accusacion brynge ye
agaynste this man 1

30 They answered, and sayd vnto
hym, Iff he were nott an evyll doar,
Ave wolde not have delyvered hym vnto
the.

31 Then sayd Pilate vnto them, Take
hym vnto you, and iudge hym, after
The lewes sayde
youre awne lawe.
vnto hym, It is nott lawfull for vs to
putt eny man to deeth ;

32 That the wordes of Jesus myght
be fulfilled, which he spake, signifyinge
what deeth he shulde deye.

33 Then Pilate entred into the iudge-
ment housse agayne, and called Jesus,
and sayd vnto him. Arte thou kynge of
the lewcs 1

34 Jesus answered, Sayst thou that off
thy sylfe, or did other tell ytt the of
me?
35 Pilate answered, Am I a lewc ?
Tiiync awnc nacion and hye prcstes have
delivered the vnto mc ; what hast thou
done ?
36 Jesus answered, My kyngdomc is
yff my kyngdomc
not of this worlde ;
were of this worlde, then wolde my min-
isters Bucrly fight, that I shuUlc not be

!

552

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

'i\> nu Jjiud-

galewi})S wesyau ludaium ;
angardi meina uist j)a]jro,
37 paruh qajj imma Peilatus, An null
jjiudans is \ju1 Andhafyands lesus [qa})],"*"
pu qi|>is, ei j^iudans im ik. Ik du [jam-
ma gabaurans im, yali du jiamma qam in
j)amma fairvvhau, ei weitwodyau sunyai.
Whazuh saei ist sunyos, hauseij) stibnos
meinaizos.

38 panuh qaj? imma Peilatus, Wlia ist
so sunya? Yah jjata qi})ands, galaij? ut
du ludaium, yah qa}) im, Ik ainohun
fairino ni bigita in jjamma.

39 I|) ist biuhti izwis, ei ainana izwis
fraletau in pascha ; wileidu nu ei fraletau
izwis jjana jjiudan ludaie ?

ludeum ; nis min rice of dysum middan-
earde.
37 Da cwaej) Pilatus to him, Eart du
witodlice cyning? Se Hselend him and-
swarode and cwse\>, Du hit segst, dcet ic
eom cyng. On dam ic com geboren,
and to dam ic com on middan-eard, diet
-^'Ic dsera de ys
ic cyde sojjfaestnysse.
on s6|)fsestnysse, gehyrj> mine stefne.

38 Da cwaej) Pilatus to him, Hwset ys
sojjfaestnys ] And da he dis^ cwse]>, da
code he eft ut to dam ludeum, and
cwoe]> to him, Ne fuude ic nanne gylt
on dysum men.

39 Hit ys eower gewuna, daet ic for-
gife eow anne man on eastron ; wylle
ge daet ic forgife eow ludea cyning ?

40 1\) eis hropidedun aftra allai, qi[>and-
Sah Jjan

ans, Ne f:ana, ak Barabban.
was sa Barabba waidedya.

40 Hig clypedon ealle, and cwaedon,
Witodlice Bar-

Na disne, ac Barraban.
rabas wses ]>eoi\

Chap. XIX. i panuh |?an nam Peila-

Chap. XIX.

i Da nam Pilatus done

tus lesu, yah usblaggw.

2 Yah }>ai gadrauhteis uswundun wipp-
ya us ])aurnum, j'^ah galagidedun imma
ana haubid, yah wastyai paurpurodai
gawasidedun "ina,

.

3 .
daie.

. Yah qe|)un, Hails, j^iudans lu-
Yah gebun imma slahins lofin.

4 Atiddya aftra ut Peilatus, yah qa]?
im, Sai ! attiuha izwis ina ut, ei witei|>,
])atei in imma ni ainohun fairino bigat.

5 paruh usiddya ut lesus, bairands
Jjana Jjaurneinan waip, yah |/0 paurpur-
Yah qa}> im, Sa ist sa
odon wastya.
manna !

6 paruh bi}>e sewlum ina j^ai maistans
gudyans yah
hropidedun,
qijjandans, Ushramei, ushramei ina.
Qa)j
im Peilatus, Nimi[) ina yus, yah hramyij),
'i\> ik fairina in imma ni bigita.

andbahtos,

7 Andhofun imma ludaicis, Weis witoj>
aihum, yah bi ]?amma witoda unsaramma
skal gaswiltan, uute sik
silban Guj^s
8unu gatawida.

8 Bi})e gahausida Peilatus jjata waurd,

mais ohta sis.

Haelend, and swang hyne.

2 And da jjegnas wiindon jjyrnenne
cyne-helm, and asetton hyne on his
heafod, and scryddon hyne mid pur-
puran reafe,

3 And hi comon to hym, and cwsedon,
And hi
Hal beo du, ludea cyning.
plsetton hyne mid hyra handum.

4 Da code Pilatus eft lit, and cwge|>,
Nu ! ic hyne Isede hider ut to eow, daet
ge ongyton, daet ic ne fiinde nanne gylt
on him.

5 Da code se Hselend iit, and baer
))yrnenne cyne-helm, and purpuran rcaf.
And ssede him, Her is man

6 Witodlice da da bisceopas and da
jjcgnas hine gesawon, da clypodon hig,
and cwsedon, Hoh hyne, hoh hyne. Da
cwaej) Pilatus to him, Nime ge hyne,
and ho]), ic ne fiinde nanne gylt on him.
7 Da ludeas him andswaredon and
cwaedon, We habbaj> se, and be ure se he
scoal sweltan, fordam de he cwaej) da^t
he wsere Godes sunu.

8 D:i Pih\tus gehyrde das sprsece, da

ondred he him daes de swidor.

XVIII. 37.-XIX. 8.] WYCLIFFE.isSp.

TYNDALE, 1526.

553

takun to the Jewis ; now forsotfie my
kyngdora is not of hennis.^
37 And so Pilat seide to him, Therfore
Jhesu answeride, Thou
art thou kyng 1
seidist, for I am a kyng.
To this thing
I am born, and to this I cam in to the
world, that I here witnessing to treuthe.
Ech that is of treuthe, heerith my voys.

38 Pilat seith to him,\yhat is treuthe?
And whanne he hadde seid this thing,
eft he wente out to the Jewis, and seide
to hem, I fynde no cause in him.

39 Forsoth it is a custom to 50U, that
I delyuer oon to 50U in pask ; therfore
wolen ^e I schal dismytte to 30U the
kyng of Jewis ?

40 Therfore thei cryeden eft alle, sey-
Forsothe

inge, Not this, but Barabas.
Barabas was a theef.

delyvered to the lewes ; but nowe is my
kingdome not from hence.

Jesus

37 Pilate sayde vnto hym, Arte thou a
answered, Thou
kynge then ?
sayst, that I am a kynge.
For this
cause was I borne, and for this cause
cam I into the worlde, that I shulde
beare witnes vnto the trueth.
All that
are of the trueth, heare my voice.
38 Pilate sayde vnto hym, What is
trueth. And when he had sayde that,
he went out agayne vnto the lewes, and
sayde vnto them, I fynde in him no
cause at all.
39 Ye have a costome amonge you,
that I shulde delyvre you won loosse at
ester ; will ye that I loose vnto you the
kynge of the lewes 1

40 Then cryed they all againe, sayinge,
Barrabas was

Not him, but Barrabas.
a robber.

Chap. XIX.

i Therfore Pilat took

Chap. XIX.

i Then Pilate toke

thanne Jhesu, and scourgide.

Jesus, and scourged hym.

2 And kny^tis foldinge a crowne of
thornes, puttiden on his heed, and diden
aboute him a cloth of purpur,

2 And the soudiers wonde a croune off
thornes, and put it on his heed, and
they did on hym a purple garment,

3 And camen to him, and seiden, Heyl,
kyng of Jewis. And thei 3auen to hym
boffatis.

4 Eft Pilat wente out, and seide to
hem, Lo !
I lede him to 30U with oute
forth, that ^e knowe, for I fynde no
cau^e in him.

5 Therfore Jhesu wente out, beringe a
crowne of thornes, and a clooth of pur-
pur. And he seith to hem. Loo ! the
man.

6 Therfore whanne the bischopis and
mynystris hadde seyn him, thei crieden,
scyinge, Crucific, crucifie him.
Pilate
seith to hem, Take ^e him, and crucifie
je, Hothli I fynde no cause in him.
7 The Jewis answeriden to liim. We
ban a lawe, and vpon the lawc lie owith
to dcie, for he made him Qoddis sone.

8 Tlierfore wliannc Pihit hadde herd

.

3 .

. And sayd, Hayl, kynge off the
lewes. And they smote hym on the
face.

4 Pilate went forthe agayne, and sayde
vnto them, Beholde ! I brynge him forth
to you, that ye maye knowe, that I
fynde no faute in hym.

5 Then cam Jesus forthe, wearynge a
croune of thornes, and a robe of purple.
And Pilate sayd vnto them, Beholde !
the man.

6 When the hye prestes and ministers
sawe him, they crycd, sayinge, Crucify
him, crucify hym.
Pilate sayde vnto
them. Take ye hym, and crucify hym,
for I fynde no cause in hym.
7 The lewes answered hym, We have
a lawe, and by oure lawe he ought to
deye, be cause he made hym silfc the
Sonne of God.

8 When Pilate licrde that sayinge, he

this word, he drcddc more.

was the moare afraydc.

1

2
1

;

554

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

9 Yali galaijj in praitainia aftra, yali
Ij? lesus

qa}) du iesua, Whajjro is ))U 1
andawaurdi ni gaf irama.

10 paruh qa}> imnia Peilatus, Du mis
ni rodeis 1 Niu waist, j^atei waldufni aih
usliramyan |)uk, yah waldufni aih fra-
letan |)uk ?

1

Andhof itesus, Ni aihtedeis waldufn-
ye ainhun ana mik, nih wesi jjus at-
sa galewyands
giban iupa|)ro ;
mik })us, maizein frawaurht habaid.

duhj^e

12 Framuh j^amma sokida Peilatus
i]> ludaieis hropidedun,
fraletan ina ;
qij)andans, Yabai )?ana fraletis, ni is fri-
yonds Kaisara ; sawliazuh izei |)iudan
sik silban tauyi]?, andstandij? Kaisara.

13 panuh Peilatus, hausyands ]){ze

.

.

9 And eode eft in to dam dom-erne,
and cw?e]) to dam Hselende, Hwanon
cart du 1 Witodlice se Hselend him no
sealde nane andsware.

10 Da cwaej? Pilatus to him, Hwi ne
sprycst dii wid me? Nast du, dcet ic
hsebbe mihte de to honne, and ic haebbe
mihte de to forlaptenne ?

1

Se Hselend him andswarode, Na^f-
dest du nane mihte ongean me, buton
hyt waerc de ufan geseald ; fordam se
hsefj) maran synne, se de me de sealde.

1

And syddan sohte Pilatus hu he
hyne forlete ; da ludcas clypodon, and
cweedon, Gif dii hine forlsetst, ne eart
selc drera de
dii da3S Caseres freond ;
hyne to cynge de]?, ys dses Caseres
wider-saca.

13 Da Pilatus, das spraece gehyrde, da
Isedde he ut done Hselend, and sa^t a?t-
foran dam dom-setle on dsere stowe, de
is genemned Lithostratos, and on Ebre-
isc Gabbatha.

14 Hit wses da eastra gegearcung-dseg,
and hyt waes seo syxte tid. Da cwae|)
he to dam ludeum, Her ys eower cyn-
ing!

^

15 Hi clypodon ealle, and cwaedon,
Nim hyne, nim hyne ; and hoh.
Da
cwae]) Pilatus, Sceal ic hon eowerne cyn-
ing "i Him andswaredon da bisceopas
and cwsedon, Nsebbe we nanne cyning
buton Casere.

16 Da sealde he hyne him, to ahonne.
Da namon hi done Haelend, and tugon
hine ut.

17 And he sylf baer his rode mid liim
on da stowe, de ys genemned Heafod-
pannan stow, and on Ebreisc Golgotha

18 Daer hi hyne ahengon, and twegen
odre mid him, on twa healfa, and done
Hselend on middan.

19 Witodlice Pilatus wrat ofer-ge^Tit,
and sette ofer his rode ; dser wa^s on ge-
writcn, DIS YS SE NAZAPvENISCA
H^'LEND, lUDEA CYNING.
20 Manega dfera ludea racddon dis
gewrit, fordam de seo stow woes gehende

2
7

;

5
9

;

XIX. 9-20.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

555

9 And he wente in to the moot halle
eft, and seyde to hym, Of whennus art
Forsothe Jhesu 3af not answere
thou ]
to him.

10 Pilat seith to him, Spekest thou
not to me 1 Wost thou not, for I haue
power for to crucifie thee, and I haue
power for to delyuere thee ?

11 Jhesu answeride, Thou schuldist
not haue ony power a5ens me, no but
it were 50uuen to thee fro aboue ; ther-
fore he that bitook me to thee, hath the
more synne.

1

Therof ^ Pilat sou^te for to delyuere
Jhesu ; forsothe the Jewis crieden, sey-
inge, If thou leeuyst this man, thou ert
not frend of Cesar ; for ech man that
makith him silf kyng, a3en seith Cesar.

13 Therfore Pilat, Avhanne he- hadde
herd thes wordis, ledde Jhesu forth,
and saat for domesman in a place, that
is seide Licostratos, in Ebrew forsothe
Golgatha."'"

14 Forsoth it was the makinge redy"*"
of pask, as the sixte our."*" And he seith
to the Jewis, Loo ! 50ure kyng.

15 Forsoth thei cryeden, seyinge, Do
Pilat
50ure
The bischopis answeriden, We

a wey, do a wey ;
seith to hem, Schal I
kyng?
ban no kyng no but Cesar.

crucifie hym.
crucifie

16 Therfore thanne Pilat bitook him
to hem, that he schulde be crucifyed.
Forsothe thei token Jhesu, and ledden
out.

1

And he berynge to him silf a cros
wente out in to that place, that is seid
of Caluarie, in Ebrew Golgatha

18 Where thei cnicifieden liim, and
©there tweyc with liini, on this syde
and on that syde, forsothe Jhesu the
myddil.

19 Forsothe and Pilat wroot a title,
and puttide on the cross ; sothli it was
writun, Jhesu Nuzaren, kyng of Jewis.

9 And went agayne in to the iudgment
housse, and sayde vnto Jesus, Whence
Jesus gave hym none an-
arte thou ?
swere.

I o Then sayde Pilate vnto hym. Speak-
est thou not vnto me 1 Knowest thou
nott, that I have power to crucify the,
and have power to loose the ?

I I Jesus answered, Thou coudest have
no power att all agaynst me, except it
were geven vnto the jfrom above ; ther-
fore he that delivered me vnto the, is
moare in synne.

,

12 And from thence forthe

sousfht
Pilate meanes to loose hym ; but the
lewes cryed, sayinge, Yf thou lett hym
goo, thou arte not Cesars frende ; who-
soever maketh himsilfe a kynge, is
agaynst Cesar.

13 ^Vhen Pilate herde that sayinge, he
brought Jesus forthe, and sate doune to
geve sentence in a place,
the
Pavement, butt in the Hebrue tonge
Gabbatha.

called

14 Hitt was the saboth even which
falleth in the ester fest, and aboute the
sixte houre. And he sayde vnto the
lewes, Beholde ! youre kynge.

1

They cryed, Awaye with hym, awaye
with hym ; crucify hym.
Pilate sayde
vnto them. Shall I crucify youre kynge 1
The hye prestes answered, We have noo
kynge but Cesar.

16 Then delivered he hym vnto them,
to be crucified. And they toke Jesus,
and ledde hym awaye.

17 And he bare his crosse and went
forthe into a place, called the place off
deed menus sculles, which is named in
Hebrue Golgatha

18 Where they crucified hym, and with
hym two other, on ether syde won, and
Jesus in the myddes.

1

Pilate wrote his title, and put it on
the crosse ; the wrytynge was, Jesus off
Nazareth, kynge off the lewes.

20 Therfore manye of the Jewis radden
this title, for the place where Jhesu was

20 This tytle reed many off the lewes,
for the place where Jesus was crucified,

5r)6

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

daere ceastre, dser se Hselend woes ahang-
en, hit wa?s a\mten Ebreiscum stafum,
and Greciscum, and Leden stafum.

21 Da cwsedon da bisceopas to Pilate,
Ne writ dii ludea cyning, ac daet lie
cwsede, Ic eom ludea cyning.

22 Da cw3ej> Pilatus, Ic wrat, dset ic

wrat.

23 Da da cempan hine ahengon, hi
namon his reaf, and worhton feower
dselas, selcum cempan anne dael, and
Seo tunece wses uuasiwod,
tunecan.
and waes call awefen.

24 Da cwsedon hi him betweonan, Ne
slite we hy, ac uton hleotan, hwylces
tire heo sy ; dset dset halige gewrit sy
gefylled, de dus cwy}>, Hi to dseldon
him mine reaf, and ofer mine reaf hi
wurpon blot.
Witodlice dus dydon da
cempan.

25 Da stodon wid da rode dses Hael-
endes moder, and his moder swuster,
Maria Cleophe, and Maria Magdalenisce.

26 Da se Hselend geseah his moder,
and done leorning-cniht standendc, de
he lufode, da cwtv]) he to his meder,
Wif, her ! ys din sunu.

27 Eft he cwse}) to dam leorning-cnihte.
Her ! ys din moder. And of &xve tide
3e leorninjj-cniht hi nam to him.

28 JEhev dyson, da se Hselend wiste
dset ealle j'ing waeron ge-endode, d.Tt
dset halige gewrit wsere gefylled, da
cwaej) he, Me )>yrst.

29 Da stod an fa?t full ecedes.

Hi
bewundon ane spingan mid ysopo seo
wses full ecedes, and sctton to his mujje.

30 Da se Hselend onfcng da?s ecedes,
da cwa-j) he, Hyt ys ge-endod. And he
ahylde his heafod, and ugeaf his gast.

31 Da ludeas bsedon Pilatimi, diet man
forbraece h^Ta sceancan, and lete
hi
nyder, fordam de hit wa'S gegearcung-
daeg, da3t da lichaman ne wunodon on
rode on reste-doege, se dseg waes msere
reste-daeg.

1

1

XIX. 21-31.] VVYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

557

crucifiede, was ny^ the citee, and it was
writen in Ebrew, Greek, and Latyn.

was neye to the cite, and it was written
in Hebrue, Greke, and Latyn.

bischops

21 Therfore the

of Jewis
seiden to Pilat, Nyle thou write kyng
of Jewis, but for he seyde, I am kyng
of Jewis.

22 Pilat answeride. That that I haue

21 Then sayde the hye prestes off the
lewes to Pilate, Wryte nott kynge off
the lewes, butt that he sayde, I am
kynge of the lewes.

22 Pilate answered, What I have writ-

writen, I haue writen.

ten, that have I written.

23 Therfore the kny5tis whanne thei
hadden crucified him, token his clothis,
and maden foure partis, to ech kny3t a
part, and a coote.
Forsothe the coote
was with out seem, and aboue wouun
bi al.

seiden

to

24 Therfore thei

gidere,
Kitte we not it, but leye we lott, whos
it is ; that the scripture be fillid, sey-
inge, Thei partiden my clothis to hem,
and in to my cloth thei senten lott.
And sothli kny^tis diden thes thingis.

25 Forsothe bisydis the cross of Jhesu
stooden his modir, and Marie Cleaphe,
the sister of his modir, and Marie Mau-
delajTi.

26 Therfore whanne Jhesu hadde seyn
the modir, and the disciple stondinge,
whom he louede, he seith to his modir,
Womman, lo ! thi sone.

27 Aftii-ward he seith to the disciple,
And fro that our the

Lo ! thi modir.
disciple took hire in to his tJdngis.

28 Aftirward Jhesu witinge, for now
alle thingis ben endid, tliat the scripture
Bchulde be fillid, he seith, I thirste.

29 Sothli a vessel was putt ful of
Thei forsothe puttinge aboue
vynegre.
with ysope the spounge ful of vynegre,
offriden to his mouth.

30 Therfore wliaiinc Jhesu hadde take
vynegre, he scide. It is endid. And the
heed bowid doun, he bitook the spirit.

3

Therfore for it was tlie makynge
redy of pask, that the bodies schuide
not dvvelle in the cross in the saboth,
for that day of sa]>oth was greet, tlic
Jewis preieden Pilat, that the ]iuj)is of
hem schulden be brokun, and takun
awey.

23 The soudiers when they had cruci-
fied Jesus, toke his garmentes, and made
foure partes, to every soudier a parte,
The coote was with
and also his coote.
out seme, woven vppon thorowe and
thorowe.

24 And they sayde won to another,
Lett vs nott devyde it, butt cast lootes,
who shall have it; that the scripture
myght be fulfilled, which sayth, They
parted my rayment amonge them, and
on my coote did cast lottes. And the
soudiers did soche thynges in dede.

25 There stode by the cross of Jesus
his mother, and his mothers sister, Mary
the wyfe off Cleophas, and Mary Mag-
dalene.

26 When Jesus sawe his mother, and
the disciple stondynge, whom he loved,
he sayde vnto his mother, Womain, be-
holde ! thy sonne.

27 Then sayde he to the disciple, Be-
thy mother. And from that
holde !
houre the disciple toke her for his awne.
28 After that, when Jesus perceaved
that all thynges were performed, that
the scriptures myght be fulfyled, he
sayde, I thyrst.

29 There stode a vessell full off veneger
They filled a sponge with venegre,
by.
and wonde it about with ysoppe, and
put it to his mougth.

30 As sone as Jesus had rcceaved of
the venegre, he sayd. It is fynnesshed.
And bowed his lieed, and gave vppe the
goost.

3

The lewes then be cause it was the
saboth even, that the bodyes shuld not
remayne apon the crossc on the saboth
daye, for that 8a])oth daye was an hye
daye, besought Pilate, that their Icggea
myght be broken, and that they myght
be taken doune.

558

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

32 Da comon da cempan, and brivcon
de mid hiin

cErest daes sceancan
ahangen waes.

33 Da hi to dam Hselende comon, and
gesawon daet he dead wses, ne breecon
hi na his sceancan ;

34 Ac an daera cempena ge-openode
his sidan mid spere, and hraedlice dar
fleow blod ut and wseter.

35 And se de hit geseah, cydde ge-
witnesse, and his gewitnes is so]? ; and
he wat daet he s6j> ssede, daet ge ge-
lyfon.

36 Das })ing wseron gewordene, daet
daet gewrit waere gefylled, Ne forbraece
ge nan ban on him.

37 [And eft oder gewrit seg|>],"^ Hi ge-

seo]) on hwaene big on-faestnodon.

38 Witodlice [aefter dam]"*" losep fram
Arimathea baed Pilatus, daet he moste
niman daes Hselendes lichaman, fordam
de he waes daes Haelendes leorning-
cniht, dis he dyde dearnunga, for dit^ra
ludea ege. And Pilatus him lyfde.
D;i
com he, and nam daes Hselendes lic-
haman.

39 And Nichodemus com dyder, se de
serest com to dam Haelende on niht,
and brohte wyrt-gemaug and alewan,
swylce hund-teontig boxa.

40 Hig namon daes Haelendes lichaman,
and bewundon bine mid linenum clade
mid wjTt-gemangum, swa ludea })eaw
ys to bebyrgennc.

41 Witodlice dar waes wyrt-tun, on
daere stowe dar se Hsclend ahangen
waes, and on dam wyrt-tiine wivs niwe
byrgen, on dcere da gyt nan man naes
died.

42 S6j)lice dar hig ledon done Haelend,
for dam daera ludea gearcung waes wid
da byrgene.

Chap. XX.

^i Witodlice on anum
reste-daejre, seo Ma^dalenisce Maria coin
on mergen, ser hit leoht waere, to daere

1

;

XIX. 33.-XX. I.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE,i526.

559

3 2 Tlierfore kuy^tis camen, and sotbly
thei braken the thi^es of tbe firste, and
of the tothir, that was crucified with
him.

33 Forsothe whanne thei hadden come
to Jhesu, as thei sy^en him deed thanne,
thei braken not his thi^es ;

34 But oon of the kny3tis openyde his
syde with a sper, and a noon bloot and
watir wente out.

35 And he that sy;, bar witnessing,
and his witnessing is trewe ; and he
woot for he seith trewe thingis, that ^e
bileue.

36 Forsothe thes thingis ben don, that
the scripture schulde be filled, 3e schulen
not breke^ a boon of him.
37 And eft anothir scripture seith, Thei
schulen se in to whom they pi3ten thorw.

38 Sotheli aftir thes thingis Joseph of
Armathi preiede Pilat, that he schulde
take awey the body of Jhesu, for that
he was a di&ciple of Jhesu, forsothe
priuey, for the drede of Jewis. And
Theifore he cam, and
Pilat sufFride.
took awey the body of Jhesu.

39 Sothli and Nycodeme cam, that
hadde come first to Jhesu in the ny^t,
beringe a medlynge of myrre and aloes,
as an hundrid pound.

40 Therfore thei token the body of
Jhesu, and bounden it in lynnen clothis
with oynementis, as it is custom to Jewis
for to birye.

41 Sothli in the place wher he was
crucified, was a ^erd, and in the ^erd a
newe graue, in which not ^it ony man
was put.

32 Then cam the soudiers, and brake
the legges of the fyrst, and of the other,
which was crucified with Jesus.

33 When they cam to Jesus, and sawe
that he was deed alredy, they brake not
his legges

34 Butt one off the soudiers with a
speare thrust hym into the syde, and
forth with cam there out blude and
water.

35 And he that sawe it, bare recorde,
and his recorde is true ; and he knoweth
that he sayth true, that ye myght beleve
also.

36 These thinges were done, that the
scripture shulde be fulfilled, Ye shall not
breake a boone of him.
37 And agayne another scripture say-
eth. They shall loke on hym whom they
pearsed.

38 After that Joseph off" Aramathia,
whych was a disciple of Jesus, but se-
cretly, for feare off the lewes, besought
Pilate, that he myght take doune the
boddy off Jesus. And Pilate gave him
licence

39 And there cam also Nicodemus,
which att the begynnynge cam to Jesus
by nyght, and brought of mirre and
aloes mingled to
gedder, aboute an
hundred pounde wayglit.

40 Then toke they the body of Jesu,
and wonde it in lynnen clothes with
those confeccions, as the manner of the
Icwes is to bury.

4

In the place where Jesus was cruci-
fied, was a garden, and in the garden a
newe sepulcre, wherin was never man
layde.

42 Therfore there for the makynge redy
of Jewis, for the graue was ny3, thei
puttiden Jhesu.

42 There layde they Jesus, be cause of
the Icwes saljotli even, for the sepulcre
was nye at honde.

CiiAP. XX.

I Forsotlie in the oon
of the salKitli,^ Mary Mawdeleyn cam
erly, whanne dcrkncssis wercn 3it, at

Chap. XX.

i The morowe after the
saboth (layc, cam Mary Magdalene erly,
wlicn it was yet darcke, vnto the sej)ul-

560

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

4

byrgene. And heo geseah clset se stan
aweg anumen wa3S fram dsere b}Tgene.

2 Da arn heo, and com to Simone
Petre, and to dam odrum leorning-
cnilite, de se Heelend lufode, and heo
cwsej) to him. Hi namon Drihten of
byrgene, and we uyton, hwar hi hyne
ledon.

3 Petrus eode ut, and se oder leorniug-

cniht, and coraon to daere byrgene.

4 Witodlice hig twegen urnon aetgsedere,
and se cder leorning-cniht for-arn Pet-
rus forne, and com rador to diure byrg-
ene.

5 And da he nyder-abeah, he geseah
da lin-W3eda licgan, and ne eode deah
in.

6 Witodlice Simon Petinis com a}fter
him, and eode into dsere byrgene, and
he geseah h'n-waeda licgan,

7 And dset swat-lin de wses uppan his
heafde, ne laeg hyt na mid dam lin-
wsedum, ac on-sundron gefealden on
anre stovve.

8 Da eode eac in se leorning-cniht, de
serest com to daere byrgene, and geseah,
and gelyfde.

9 Witodlice da git hi ne cudon halige
gewrit, diet hit gebyrede da^t he sceolde
fram dea}>e arisan.

10 Da foron eft da leorning-cnihtas to

dam cdrum.''"

11 Witodlice Maria stod dar iite a^t
dsere byrgene and weoj). And da heo
weop, lieo abeah nyder, and beseah
innan da byrgene.

12 And geseah twegen entjlas sittau
mid hwitum reafe, anne a?t dam heafdum
and oderne xt dam fotum, da^r daiS
Haelendes lie aled wa?s.

13 Hi cwsedon to hyre, Wif, hwi wepst
dii 1 Da cwoej) heo to hym, Fordam hi
namon minne Drihten, and ic uat, hwar
hi hine ledon.

1

Da heo das )>ing ssede, da bewcnde
on-baBC, and geseah liwar se
heo hi
Hcelend stod, and heo nyste djet hyt se
Hselend wres.

15 Da cwrej) se Hselend to hyre, Wif,
Heo
hwi wepst dii ? hwa'ne secst du ]
wende diet hit se wyrt-weard waere, and

1

XX. 2-15.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.
the graue. And she sy3 the stoon turn-
ed a^en fro the graue.

2 Therfore she ran, and cam to Sy-
mount Petre, and to a nothir disciple,
whom Jhesu louyde, and seith to hem,
Thei han take the Lord fro the graue,
and we witen not, where thei han put
him.

3 Therfore Petre wente out, and thilke
othere disciple, and thei camen to the
graue.

4 Forsoth

thei tweyne runnen to
gidere, and thilke other disciple ran
bifore sunner than Petre, and cam first
to the ofraue.

5 And whanne he hadde ynbowyd him,
he sy3 the scheetis putt, nethelees he
entride not.

6 Therfore Symount Petre cam suynge
hym, and he entride in to the graue,
and he sy^ the scheetis putt,

7 And the sudarie that was on his
heed, not putt with the scheetis, but by
it silf wlappid in to

place.

8 Thei-fore thanne and thilke disciple
that cam first to the graue, entride, and
sy3, and bileuede.

9 Forsothe thei wisten not the scrip-
ture, for it bihofte him for to ryse a3en
fro deede men.

10 Therfore the disciplis wenten eft to

hem selue.

1

Forsoth Marie stood at the graue
Therfore while
withoute forth wepynge.
she wepte, sche bowide hir, and biheld
forth in to the graue.

12 And she 8y3 twcy angelis sittynge
in wliyt, oon at the heed and oon at the
feet, wher the body of Jhesu was putt.

13 Thei seyn to liir, Womman, what
She seid to hem. For
wepist thou 1
thei han takun a wey my lord, and I
woot not, where thei lian putt him.

14 Whanne she liadde seid thcs thingis,
she was turnyd a bak, and sy3 Jliesu
it was
stondinire, and wiste not for
Jliesu.

15 Jhesu seith to hir, Womman, wliat
we]>i8t thou 1 whom sekist thou ]
She
gessinge for he was a gardener, seith

TYNDALE, 1526.

561

ere. And sawe the stone rowled awaye
from the toumbe.

2 Then she ranne, and cam to Simon
Peter, and to the other disciple, whom
Jesus loved, and sayde vnto them, They
have taken awaye the Lorde out ofi" the
toumbe, and we cannot tell, where they
have layde hym.

3 Peter went forth, and that other

disciple, and cam vnto the sepulcre.

4 They ranne bothe to gether, and that
other disciple did out runne Peter, and
cam fyrst to the sepulcre.

5 And he stouped doune, and sawe the

lynnen clothes, yet went he not in.

6 Then cam Simon Peter folowynge
hym, and went into the sepulcre, and
sawe the lynnen clothes lye,

7 And the napkyn that was aboute hys
heed, nott lyinge wyth the lynnen clothes,
but wrapped togedder in a place by yt
sylfe.

8 Then went in also that other disciple
whych cam fyrst to the sepulcre, and he
sawe, and beleved.

9 For as yett they knew nott the
scriptures, that he shulde ryse agayne
from deeth.

I o And the disciples went awaye agayne

vnto their awne home.

I I Mary stode with out att the sepul-
As she wept, she bowed

cre wepynge.
her sylfe into the sepulcre,

12 And sawe two angels clothed in
whyte sittyng, the one att the heed and
the other at the fete, where they had
layde the body of Jesus.

13 They sayde vnto her. Woman, why
She sayde vnto them,
wepest thou 1
They have taken awaye my lorde, and
I wote not, where they have layde him.
14 When she had thus sayde, she
turned her sylfe backe, and sawe Jesus
stondynge, and knewe not that it was
Jesus.

15 Jesus sayde vnto her, Woman, why
wcpcst thou ) whom sekcst thoul
She
supoosyngc that he had bene the gar-

u u

6
8

;

562

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON", 995.

[St. John

cwse)) to him, Leof, gif du bine name,
sege me, hwar du liine ledest, and ic
hine nime.

1

Da cw^e]) se Hsclend to hyre, !Maria.
Heo bewende bi and cwve\> to bim, llab-
boni, dset ys gecwedcn, lareow.

17 Da cwse)) se Hselend to b}Te, Ne
cet-brln dii min, nu gyt ic ne astab
to minum feder ; gang to minum brodr-
um, and sege bim, Ic astige to minum
feeder and to eowinim faeder, and to
minum Gode and to eowrum Gode.

1

Da com seo Magdalenisce Maria,
and cydde dam leorning-cnibtum and
cwse)?, Ic geseab Dribten, and das })ing
he me Sccde.'''

19 Da hit wses sefen, on anon djera
reste-daga, and da dura wseron belocene,
dser da leorning-cnibtas wseron gegad-
erode, for drera ludea ege, se Hselend
com, and stod to-middes byra, and cwse]?
to bim, Sig sibb mid cow.

20 And da be dset cwre]?, be aet-ywde
him bis banda and bis sidan ; da Icorn-
ing-cnibtas waeron blij)e, da hi biefdon
Dribten gesewen.

21 He cwsejj eft to bim, Sig sibb mid
eow ; swa swa feeder me sende, ic sende
eow.

22 Da he doet cw?e|>, da bleow be on
hi, and cwsej) to him, Underfoj) Haligne
Gast

23 Dsera synna de ge forgyfa)?, bi beo]>
him forgyfene ; and dara de ge healdaj>,
big beo^ gebealdene.

24 WitodHce Thomas, an

of dam
twelfum, de ys gecweden Didlmus, da?t
ys, Gclycost, on ure gejieode, be na?s
mid him, da se Hselend com.

25 Da cwsedon da odre leorning-cnibtas
to bim, We gesawon Dribten. Da cwse))
he to him, Ne gclyfe ic, biiton ic gcseo
dsera nsegla fi\?stnunge on bis banda, and
ic do minne finger on dsera nsegla stede,
and do mine hand to bis sidan.

26 And eft

sefter cabta daguni bis
leorning-cnibtas w?eron inne, and Thom-
as mid bim. Se Haelend com, beloccnum

9

;

1

;

XX. 1 6-26.] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE,i526.

5G3

to him, Sire, if thou hast takun him vp,
seye to me, where thou hast put him^
and I schal take him a wey.

t6 Jhesu seith to hir, Marie.

She
conuertid seith to him, Eabbony, that is
seid, maistir.

17 Jhesu seith to hir, Nyle thou touche
me, for I haue not ^it styled to my
fadir ; forsothe go to my britheren, and
seye to hem, I stye to my fadir and
5oure fadir, to my God and 30ure God.

18 Mary !Mawdeleyn cam, tellinge to
disciplis. For I sy3 the Lord, and thes
thingis he seide to me.

1

Therfore whanne euentid was in that
day, oon of the sabotis, and the 5atis
disciplis weren
weren schitt, where
gederid, for the drede of Jewis, Jhesu
cam, and stood in the myddel of hem,
and seide to hem,'Pees to 30U.

20 And whanne he hadde seid this
thing, he schewide to hem hondis and
the syde ; therfore the disciplis ioyeden,
the Lord seyn.

21 Therfore he seith to hem eft, Pees
to 30U ; as the fadir sente me, and I
sende 50U.

22 Whanne he hadde seid thes thingis,
he blew ynne, and seide, Take ^e the
Hooly Gost

23 Whos synnes 50 schulen for^yue,
thei ben for30uun ; and whos synnes 3e
schulen withholde, thei ben withholdun.

24 Forsothe Thomas, oon of the twelue,
was

that is seid Didymus,
not with hem, whaunc Jhesu cam.

25 Therfore othere disciplis seidcn, "We
han seyn the Lord.
Forsothe he seide
to hem, No but I schal se in his hoTidis
the ficching of naylis, and schal sende
my fyngris in to places of naylis, and
I schal scndc myn hondc in to his syde,
I sclial not bileuc.

26 And aftir ei3te daycs eft his

dis-
ci j)l is weren with ynne, and Thomas
with hem.
Jhesu cam, the 3atis schitt,

dener, sayde vnto hym, Syr, if thou have
borne him hence, tell me, where thou
hast layde him, and I will take hym
awaye.

16 Jesus sayde vnto her, Mary.

She
turned her sylfe and sayde vnto hym,
E-aboni, which is to saye, master.

17 Jesus sayde vnto her, Touche me
not, for I have nott yet ascended to my
father ; butt goo to my brothren, and
saye vnto them, I ascende vnto my
father and youre father, my God and
youre God.

18 Mary Magdalene cam, and tolde the
disciples. That she had sene the Lorde,
and that he had spoken soche thinges
vnto her.

19 The same daye at nyght, whych
was the morowe after the saboth daye,
when the dores were shutt, where the
disciples were assembled to gedder, for
feare of the lewes, cam Jesus, and stode
in the myddes, and sayd to them, Peace
be with you,

20 And when he had so sayde, he
shewed vnto them his hondes and his
fete and his syde ; then were the dis-
ciples glad, when they sawe the Lorde.

2

He sayde vnto them agayne, Peace
as my father sent me,

be with you ;
even so sende I you.

22 When he had sayde that, he bluwe
on them, and sayde vnto them, Receave
the Holy Goost

23 Whosoevers synnes ye remyt, they
are remitted vnto them ; and whoso-
evers synnes ye retayne, they are re-
tayned.

24 Thomas, one off the twelve, called
was

Didimus,
not with them, when Jesus cam.

25 The other disciples sayd vnto hym.
We have sene the Lorde. And he sayde
vnto them, Except I se in his hondes
the prent of the nayles, and put my
fynger in the holes off tlie nayles, and
thrustc my hondc into hys syde, I will
not belcve.

26 And after viij daycs agayne the
disciples were with in, and Thomas was
Jesus cam, when the dorcs
with them.

o

2

5G4

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

durum, and stcd to-middes him, and
cw8ej>, Slg eow sibb.

27 Syddan he ssede Thome, Do* dinne
finger hider, and geseoh mine handa,
and nim dine hand, and do on mine
sidan, and ne beo du ungeleafful, ac ge-
leafful,

28 Thomas andswarode, and cwaej) to
him, Du eart min God and min Drihten.
29 Se Hselend cw8e|j to him, Dii ge-
lyfdest, fordam du me gesawe ; da
synd eadigc, de ne gesawon, and ge-
lyfdon.

30 Witodl'ce manege odre tacen se
Haelend worhte on his leorninfj-cnihta
gesyh]?e, de ne synd on dysse bee awrit-
ene.

31 Witodlice das jjing synd awritene,
dset ge gelyfon, d?et se Haelcnd ys Crist,
Godes sunu, and daet ge habbon ece lif
donne ge gelyfaj) on his naman.

Chap. XXI.

^i Eft oefter dam se
set

Haelend hine geswiitelode dus
dsere Tiberiadiscan sse

2 Simon Petrus, and Thomas, de ys
gecweden Gelicost, wseron
letgsedere,
and Nathanahel, se wses of Chanaa Ga-
lilese, and Zebedeus suna, and odre twe-
gen drera Icorning-cnihta.
3 Da cwaej) Simon Petrus to him, Tc
wylle gan on fixo]?. Da cwaedon hi to
him, And we \YyllaJ' gan mid de.
And
hi eodon ut, and eodon on scip. And
ne fengon nan jjing on daere nihte.

4 Witodlice on sei'ne mergen,.se Hael-
end stod on dam strande ; ne gecneowon
deah da leorning-cnihtas, diet hit se
Haelend wa^s.
5 Da cwiej? se Haelend to him, Cnapan,
Hig and-

cwecle ge, hjvbbe ge sufol 1
swarodon him and cwsedon, Nese.

6 He c\v?e}> to him, Laetaj> da^t nett on
da swidran healfe dii^s rewettes, and ge
Hig leton witodlice, and ne
gemetaj>.
mihton hit ateon, for 6ixva fixa nijenigeo.

7 Witodlice se leorning-cniht, de se

XX. 27.-XXI. 7-] WYCLIFFE, 1389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

565

and stood in the myddel, and seide,
Pees to 50U.

27 Aftirward he seith

to Thomas,
Bryng yn hidur thi fyngur. and se myn
hondis, and bryng to thin hond, and
send in to my syde, and nyle thou be
vnbileueful, but feithful.

28 Thomas answeride, and seide to

him, My Lord and my God.
29 Jhesu seith to him, Thomas, for
thou hast seyn me, thou bileuedist ;
blessid ben thei, that sy3en not, and han
bileuyd.

30 Forsothe and Jhesus dide manye
othere signes in the sy^t of his disciplis,
•whiche ben not writun in this book.

were shet, and stode in the myddes, and
sayde, Peace be with you.

27 Then sayde he to Thomas, Put in
thy fynger here, and se my hondes,
and putt forth thy honde, and thrust
hym into my syde, and be nott wyth
out fayth, but beleve.

28 Thomas answered, and sayde vnto

hym. My Lorde and my God.

29 Jesus sayde vnto hym, Thomas,
because thou hast sene me, therfore hast
thou beleved ; happy are they, that
have not sene, and yet have beleved.

30 And many other signes did Jesus
in the presence of his disciples, which
are not written in this boke.

31 Forsothe thes ben writun, that 5e
bileue, for Jhesu is Crist, the sone of
God, and that 5e bileuynge haue lyf in
his name.

31 These are written, that ye myght
beleve, that Jesus is Christ, the sonne
of God, and that ye in belevynge myght
have life thorewe his name.

Chap. XXI.

i Aftirward Jhesu eft
schewide him to his disciplis, at the see
of Tyberias.

Sothli he schewide thus.

2 Ther weren to gidere Symount Petre,
and Thomas, that is seid Didymus, and
Nathanael, that was of the Cane of Gali-
lee, and the sones of Zebedee, and tweye
othere of his disciplis.

3 Symount Petre seith to hem, I go
Thei seyn to him. And
for to fysche.
we comen with thee. And thei 5eden
'out, and sti3eden in to a boot. And in
that ni3t thei token nothing.

4 Forsoth the morwe maad, Jhesu
stood in the brynke ; nethelees the dis-
ciplis knewen not, for it was Jhesu.

5 Therfore Jhesu seith to hem. Chil-
dren, wher 36 han ony soupynge thing ?
Thei answcriden. Nay.

6 He seide to hem, Send 3c the nett
in to the ri3thalf of the rowyng, and 3c
Tiierforc thei scnten the
flchulcn fynde.
nett, and now thei my3tcn not drawc it,
for multitude of fyschis.

7 Therfore thilkc disciple, whom Jhesu

Chap. XXI.

i After thatt Jesus
shewed hym silfe agayne ... at the
And on this wyse
see of Tyberias.
shewed he him silfe.

2 There were to gedder Simon Peter,
and Thomas, which is called Didimus,
and Nathanael, of Cana a cite of Galile,
and the sonnes off Zebedei, and two
other off the disciples.

3 Simon Peter sayde vnto them, I goo
They sayde vnto hym, We
afysshynge.
They went
also wyll goo wyth the.
their waye, and entred into a shippe
And that nyght caught
strayght waye.
they noo thynge.

4 When the mornynge was nowe come,
Jesus stode on the shore ; neverthelesse
the disciples knewe not, that it was
Jesus.

5 Jesus sayde vnto them, Syrs, have
ye eny meatel They answered hym,
Noo.

6 And he sayde vnto them. Cast out
youre nett on the right syde of the
They cast
shippe, and ye shall fynde.
out, and anon they were not able to
drawe it, for the multitude of fysshcs.

7 Then sayde the disci i)lc, whom Jesus

8

5GG

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. Johx

Hselend lufode, cwoej? to Petre, Hit ys
Da Petrus gehyrde da?t hit
Driliten.
Drihten woes, da dyde he on his tunecan,
and begyrde hine, witodlice he waes ser
nacod, and scet innan sae.

8 Da odre leorning-cnihtas rcowon
lande,
dser-to,
swylce hit wsere twa hund elna, and
tugon hyi'a fisc-nett.

hi waeron unfeor fi-am

9 Da hig on land eodon, hi gesawon
licgau gleda, and fisc dar on fyr, and
hlaf.

10 Da cwsej) se Hselend to him, Bring-

a|> da fixas, de ge nu gefeugon.

11 Simon Petrus eode up, and teh liis
nett on land, micelra fixa full, dara wa^s
hund-teontig and Jjreo and fiftig ; and
da hyra swa fsela waes, nses da^t nett
tobrocen.

12 Da cwfej) se Hselend to him, Gaj)
And nan doera de dar
hyder, and eta|>.
sset, ne dorste hine acsian, Hwset he
wsere, hi wiston dset hit wa?s Driliten.

13 And se Hsclend com, and nam hlaf,

and eac fisc, and scalde him.

14 On dysum wa2s se Hselend j^riwa
gesAvutelod his leorning-cnihtum, da he
aras of dea)'e.

15 Da hi seton, ^da cwsej) se Hselend
to Simon Petre, Simon lohannis, lufast
du me swidor donne das ? He cw?e)) to
him, Gea, Drihten, du wast da^t ic de
lufige. He cwse]) to him, Heald mine
lamb.

16 He cwiej? eft to him, Simon lohan-
nis, lufast du me ? He cwpej) to him,
Gea, Drihten, dii wast d?et ic de lufige.
Da cwas}) he to him, Heald mine lamb.

17 He cwre|5 j^riddan side to him, Simon
lohannis, lufiist du me ? Da wa^s Petrus
sarig, fordam de he cwa^J) jn-iddan side
to him, Lufast dii me, and he cw£e}> to
him, Drihten, du wast calle j'iiig ;
dii
wast da^t ic de lufige. Da cwa^]) he to
him, Heald mine sccap.

1

S6|7, ic secge de, da du gingra wsere,
dii gyrdest de, and eodcst da^r dii wold-
caldest, du
cst ;
strecst dine handa, and oder de gyrt,

witodlice donne dii

7

;

6
1

XXI.8-I8.] WYCLIFFE,i389.

TYNDALE, 1526.

;

567

louede, selde to Petre, It is the Lord.
Symount Petre, whanue he hadde herd
for it was the Lord, girte him with a
eoote, sothli he was nakid, and sente
him in to the see.

8 Sothli

othere disciplis camen by
boot, for thei weren not fer fro the lond,
but as two hundrid cubitis, drawynge
the nett of fischis.

9 Therfore as thei camen doun in to
the lond, thei sy5en colis put, and a
fysch put aboue, and breed.

It

is the

loved, vnto Peter,
Lorde.
When Simon Peter herde that it was
the Lorde, he gyi'de his mantell to hym,
for he was naked, and sprange into the
see.

8 The other disciples cam by shippe,
for they were nott farre from londe,
butt as itt were two hondred cubites,
and they drewe the net with fisshes.

9 As sone as they were come to londe,
they sawe hoot coles layde, and fisshe
layde ther on, and breed.

10 Jhesu seith to hym, Brynge ^e of

10 Jesus sayde vnto them, Brynge of

the fischis, whiche 5e ban taken now.

11 Symount Petre

sti5ede vp, and
drow3 the nett in to the lond, ful of
grete fischis, an hundrid fyfti and thre ;
and whanne thei weren so greete, the
nett is not brokun.

12 Jhesu seith to hem, Come 5e, ete
56. And no man of the sittinge at mete
durste axe him, Who art thou, witinge
for it is the Lord.

13 And Jhesu cam, and took breed,

and 5af to hem, and the fysch also.

14 Now this thridde day Jhesu is
disciplis, whanue he

schewid to
hadde rise a^en fro deed men.

his

15 Therfore whanne thei hadden etyn,
Jhesu seith to Symount Petre, Symount
of John, louest thou me more than
to hym, 3'^^,
thes don ?
thou
Lord,
thee.
I
Jhesu seith to him, Feede thou my
lambren.

He seith
wost
for

loue

16 Eft he seith to hym, Symount of
John, louest thou me ? And he seith
to him, 3he, Lord, thou wost for I loue
thee. He seith to him, Feede thou my
lambren.

1

He seith to him the thridde tyme,
Symount of John, louest thou me 1
Petre is sori, for he seith to him the
thridde tyme, Louest thou me, and he
him, Lord, thou wost
seith
alle
thou wost for I loue thee.
thingis ;
Jhesu Keith to him, Feede thou my
schcep.

to

1

the fisshes, which ye have nowe caught.
Simon Peter stepped forthe, and
drewe the nett to londe, full of greate
fisshes, an hondred and .liij. and for all
there were so many, yet was not the
net broken.

12 Jesus sayde vnto them. Come, and
And none of the disciples durste
dyne.
axe hym. What arte thou, for they
knewe that it was the Lorde.

13 Jesus then cam, and toke breed,

and gave them, and fisshe lykwyse.

14 And this is nowe the thyrde tyme
that Jesus apered to his disciples, after
that he was rysen agayne from deeth.

15 When they had dyned, Jesus sayde
to Simon Peter, Simon Joanna, lovest
thou me more then these? He sayde
vnto hym. Ye, Lorde, thou knowest that
I love the. He sayde vnto hym, Fede
my lambes.

1

He sayde to hym agayne the seconde
tyme, Simon Joanna, lovest thou me 1
He sayde vnto hym, Ye, Lorde, thou
knowest that I love the. He sayde vnto
hym, Fede my shepe.

17 He sayde vnto hym the thyrde
tyme, Simon Joanna, lovest thou me 1
Peter sorowcd, because he sayde the
thyrde tyme, Lovest thou me, and sayde
vnto hym, Lorde, thou knowest all
thynge ; thou knowest that I love the.
Jesus sayde vnto hym, Fede my shepe.

18 Trculi, trculi, T scic to thee, whanne
thou were ^ongcre, thou girdcdist thee,
and wandridest where thou woldist
sothli whanne thou schalt wcxc eldcre,

18 Vercly, vercly, T saye vnto the, when
thou wast yonge, thou gcrdcdst thy silfe,
and walkedst whither thow woklost
but when thou arte olde, thou shalt

5G8

GOTHIC, 360.

ANGLO-SAXON, 995.

[St. John

and Iset dyder de du nelt.

;

19 Dset he witodlice ssede, and tacnode
hwylcon deajje he wolde God geswut-
^And da he dset saede, da cwsej)
elian.
he to him, Fylig me.

20 Da Petrus hine bewende, da geseah
he dset se leorning-cniht him fyligde, de
Be Hselend lufode, se de hlinode on ge-
beorscype ofer his breost, and cwsej?,
Drihten, hwset ys, se de de belsewj) 1

21 Witodlice da Petrus dysne geseah,
da cwaej) he to dam Haelende, Drihten,
hwset sceal des 1

22 Da cw8ej> se Hselend to him, Ic
wylle dret he wunige dus od ic cume,
hwaet to de ? fylig dii me.

23 Witodlice deos spraec com ut ge-
mang brodrum, daet se leorning-cniht
ne swylt. And ne cwaej) se Hselend to
him, ne swylt he, ac, Dus ic wylle daet
he wunige od ic cume, hwaet to de 1

24 Dis ys se leorning-cniht, de cy\>
gewitnesse be dyson, and vnrat dus ping
and we witon, daet hys gewitnes ys s6)>.

25 Witodlice odre manega |)ing synd
de se Hselend worhte, gif da ealle a-
writene wseron, ic wene ne mihte des
middan-eard ealle da bee befon. Amen.

9

XXI. 19-25-] WYCLIFFE, 13S9.

TYNDALE, 1526.

569

tbou schalt bolde forth thin hondis, and
anothir schal girde thee, and leede thee
whidir thou wolt not.

19 Sothli he seide this thing, signyfy-
inge by what deeth he was to glorifiynge
God. And whanne he hadde seid thes
thingis, he seith to him, Sue thou me.

20 Petre conuertid sy3 thilke disciple,
whom Jhesu louede, and which restide
in the souper on his brest, and he seide
to hym, Lord, who is it, that schal bi-
traye thee 1

2 1 Therfore whanne Petre hadde seyn
tills disciple, he seith to Jhesu, Lord,
what forsothe this 1

22 Jhesu seith to him, So I wole him
dwelle til I come, what to thee 1 sue
thou me.

23 Therfore this word wente out a
mong britheren, for thilke disciple dey-
eth not. And Jhesu seide not to him,
for he deieth not, but. So I wole him
dwelle til I come, what to thee 1

24 This is thilke disciple, that berith
witnessing of thes thingis, and wroot
thes thingis ; and we witen, for his wit-
nessing is trewe.

25 Forsothe there ben and manye
othere syngnes^ that Jhesu dide, whiche
if thei ben writun by eche by hem silue,
I deme neither the world him silf to
inowe take tho bookis, that ben to be
writun.

stretche forthe thy hondes, and a nother
shall gyrde the, and leade the whither
thou woldest not.

1

That spake he, signifyinge by what
deeth he shulde glorify God. And when
he had sayde thus, he sayd to hym,
Folowe me.

20 Peter turned about and sawe that
disciple, whom Jesus loved, folowynge,
which also lened on his brest at super,
and sayde, Lorde, which is he, that shall
betraye the 1

2 1 When Peter sawe hym, he sayde to

Jesus, Lorde, what shall he here do 1

22 Jesus sayd vnto hym, Yf I will
have hym to tary tyll I come, what is
that to the 1 folowe thou me.

23 Then went this sayinge a broode
amonge the brethren, that that disciple
shulde nott deye. And Jesus sayde nott
to hym, he shall not deye, butt, Yff I will
that he tary tyll I come, what is that
to the]

24 The same disciple is he, which testi-
fieth off these thynges, and wrote these
thynges; and we knowe, thatt hys testy-
mony is true.

25 There are also many other thynges
which Jesus did, the which yff they
shulde be written every won, I suppose
the worlde coulde nott contayne the
bokes, that shulde be written.

Here endith the gospel of John.

Here endetli the Gospcll off Sainct

Jhon.

NOTES ON

THE GOTHIC VEESION.

Title, p. 2, column i.—The Title of
St. Matthew does not exist in the Codex
Argenteus, but it is complete in St. Mark,
where the MS. has Aiwaggelyo }airh
Marku anastodei)? Evangelium secun-
dum Marcum incipit.
From this, the
Title of St. Matthew is taken. Aiwaggel-
a mere transliteration of the
yo is
Greek EvayyeXtov ; for, as y, before an-
other y in Greek, has the sound of n,
so it has in the Gothic, and Aiwaggelyo
is, therefore, pronounced Aiwangelyo,
with the same meaning as EvayyeXiov,
and the Latin Evangelium, that is glad
Our Anglo-Saxon
tidings, good news.
forefathers translated EvayyeXiov by god
good, and spell a navigation, news, that
The
is Godspell, our present Gospel.
writers of the Gospels were then styled
Godspelleras, our old Gospellers, and
now Evangelists, from EuayyeXio-rTy?, and
the Latin Evangelista an Evangelist,
or hringer of glad tidings.

Matt. i. 21. The Gothic text is based
upon the Codex Argenteus, as given in

— " Codex Argenteus, sive sacrorum

EvanGfcliorum Versionis Gothica3 frajr-
menta, quae iterum recognita adnota-
tionibusque instriicta'per lineas singidas
adjidem codicis, additis fragmentis evan-
gelicis codicum Ambrosianorum, et tab-
Edidit Andreas
ula lapide expressa.
Uppstrom, Ph. D. AA. LL. M. in Rcgia
Academia Upsaliensi Linguae Gothicae
docens, et in schola Cathedrali adjunctus.
Upsaliix? : C. A. Leffler Reg. Acad. Ty-
pographus, 1854 et 1857."

Dr. Uppstrom has published, on the
same plan, the Gothic Fragments of
St. Matthew's Gospel fi'om the MS. in

the Ambrosian Library at Milan, con-
taining ch. XXV. 38-46: xxvi.1-3, 65-75:

and xxvii. i ;—Part of St. Paul's Epistle
to the Romans from the Codex Caro-
in the Library of Wolfenbiittel
linus,
in the Duchy of Brunswick ;— and the

Interpretatio,
Skeireins, i. e. 'Epfirjvfia,
or Commentary of part of St. John's
Gospel, from the MSS, in the Vatican
They are
and Ambrosian Libraries.
printed in an inexpensive form, — an
8vo. pamphlet of 48 pages, —with this
Title, — " Fragmenta Gothica Selecta,
ad fidem codicum Ambrosianorum Carol-
Edidit Andreas Uppstrom,
ini Vaticani.
Upsalise, C. A. Leffler, Reg. Acad. Typo-
In his preface,
graphus mdccclxi."
he defends himself from some severe
and
strictures,
valuable work does not appear to have
deserved.

which his

laborious

Where our text differs from Dr. LTpp-
strom's, a small t is placed after the
word or clause in the text, referring to
these notes for the reason of the altera-
tion, or for the source of the addition.
The indcfaticfable and learned Massmaiui
has made up some of the verses of the
lost chapters of St. Matthew by quota-
tions from other sources.
These verses
are given from the other Gospels, in the
text of Upps. on the plan of Professor
Massmann's most useful and compre-
hensive "Ulfilas. Die Heiligen Schrift-
en alten und neuen Bundes in Goth-
ischer Sprache : Mit gegeniiberstehendem
Griechischem und Lateinischem Texte,
Anmerkungen, Worterbuch, Sprachlehre
und geschichtlicher Einleitung von H,
F. Massmann. 8vo. Stuttgart, 1857."

—

—
—
—

—

—

St. Matt. i. 21.-vii. 28.]

GOTHIC NOTES.

571

31.

Partly, from Lk. iii. 7, 8.

Matt. i. 21. Taken partly, from Lk.i.
Forlesu, see Note on Mt. vii. 28.
iii. 3. Partly, from Lk. iii. 4 ; Mk. i.
3.—7, 8.
9. Partly, from Lk. iii. 8 Mass.— 10.
Exactly, from Lk. iii.
9, the text of
Upps. which agrees with Mass. — 11.
Partly, from Lk. iii. 16 : Mk. i. 8 :
Skeireins 4to. Mass. p. 14, and 42 :
The
Upps. 4to.
words within square brackets [ ] are
added here and in other places to com-
plete the sense. See Mass. Ulfilas, p. 38.

p. 25.

8vo.

p.

I

:

iv. 4.

Partly, from Lk. iv. 4 Mass.

ly, from Lk. iv.

5. Partly, from Lk. iv. 9.— 6. Exactly,
from Lk. iv. 9-1 1.— 7. Exactly, ft-om
the last clause of Lk. iv. 12.—10. Part-
8.—17. Partly, from
Mk. i. 15 Mass.—18. From Mk. i. 16.
19. From Mk. i. 17.—20, 21. Partly,
from Mk. i. 18, 19, 20 Mass.— 22. Part-
ly, from Mk. i. 20.
V. 3. From Lk. vi. 20 Mass. — 8.
Exactly, from Skeireins Mass. 4to. p.
26, col. 2, and p. 48, col. 2 ; also Upps.
4to. p. I : 8vo. p. 37, 20-23 ' ^^so Cast.
Palimpsests. As Cast.Mai.
Mai. p. 24.
tlie contraction for Count Castiglione
and Angelo Mai, will be quoted here-
after, it may be noticed, that they have
published Ulphilse, in Ambrosianis pa-
limpsestis, specimen {see Note on ch. vii.
Mai had discovered in the Am-
28).
brosian Library at Milan, in 18 17, parts
of the Gothic translation of the Scrip-
tures, under more recent writing.
These
are called Palimpsests or rescripts, be-
cause they were TraXinxjrrja-TOL cleaned
again (from ttoXiv again, and v//'da) to
acouTy clean) ; tliat is, the original writ-
ing was washed off the parchment, that
it might be used for a new manuscript.
The first writing could seldom ])e en-
tirely obliterated, and it could, there-
fore, be often read under, and on the
Facsimiles
side of the later writing.
are given by Cast. Mai. They recovered
under other writing, not only this 8th
verse of Matt, v., but otlier parts of
Scripture, sec note on ^fatt. i. 2 i, p. 570.

—13. See Lk. xiv. 34 ; Mk. ix. 50 Mass.
—15. Here the Codex Argenteus be-

gins, and continues to ch. vi. 32, where
another chasm occurs in the MS. in-
dicated by a blank space in the Gothic
Upps. p. 2 and 4.—15e. The
column.
small italic letter after the number of
the verse, indicates the word referred to
in the verse. The first word of the verse
is denoted by a, the second by h, and
Thus, 15e denote verse
the fifth by'e.
15, and e the fifth word of that verse,
Arg. has liutei)?, evidently
or liutei]?.
a mistake for liuhteij? ; see liuhtyai in
29i. Arg. has usstagg,
the next verse.
but it ought to be usstigg.
'^Sij. Arg.
has fiais fiand for fiyais fij^and.

vi. 24y. Mammonin—In the margin
of the Codex Argenteus, against this
word, Upps. was the first to
notice
faihu};ra[ina] which Junius Glos. says,
"videtur mihi composita ex faihu opes,
divitice ; et ])reihan pronere, comprimere,
elidere, affligere ; propter multiplices il-
las curas, quae acquirendas acquisitasque
opes comitantur," p. 244.
FaihuJ?raina
is from Lk. xvi. 9. The A.S. translates
hovk^vew \ia\i(iiva servire mamonce, by
woruld-welan worldly weal.

vii. 28e. iS in Arg. is a contrac-
tion for iSSnS.
I)r. Marshall, in
the Gothic and Anglo-Saxon Gospels of
1665, was the first to suggest this true
reading, in a note on Mt. xi. 1 6, p. 405.
Dr. Marshall's suggestion was verified
by Cast. Mai in 18 19.
Esdras ii. 36,
where the word was first found written in
full: thus ns rAK^A iesnis
us garda lesuis, r<5 oUco 'Ir/o-ol de domo
They then add, in a note, " Ita
lesu.
codex explicatis omnibus littcris IG-
Ergo
SniS, quum alibi sit ifUS.
nunc omnino definitur controvcrsia num
legendum sit IGSHS an lAlSHS,
de qua jampridem egerant Ihreus in
Ulphila illustr. ad Marc. i. 45. Gordo-
nus i7i specimine animadv. critic,
ct
Knittelius in Commcntario ad Ulphil.
Ulphilcn partiuni ineditaruni
in Ambrosianis Palim^Jsestis ah Angelo
Maio repo.rtarum specimen, conjunctia
curis ejusdem Maii ct ' Caroli Octavii

321."

J).

—

—

—

—

—

GOTHIC NOTES. [St. Matt. Ix.IS.-John iii. 26.
words,—Nullus etiam est hominum, qui

572

Castillionmi
1819, p. 2.
sests, see note to Mt. v. 8.

Mediolani
editum,
For an account of Palimp-

4to.

Matt. ix. Ibt, Arg. atgagggand for

atgaggand.

xi. 10. Arg. has meinna, it should be

meinana meurti, to agree with aggilu.
15c. From 15c. to 235'. Arg. is almost
illecfible. The deficient letters and words
are most carefully supplied by Upps.
chiefly from the other Gospels, so as
exactly to fill the same spaces in the
Codex Arg. as the original letters and
words occupied before they were worn
With the
away or become illegible.
aid of a good magnifying glass, and a
clear light, which the constant access to
the Oodex enabled Dr. Uppstrom to
choose, the distinct outlines and even
faint traces of letters and words were
Guided by these, and the
discovered.
exact spaces to be filled up in the de-
fective Codex, there can be little doubt
of the correct restoration of the deficient
letters and words.
These, in our Text,
are all placed within brackets.

XXV. 38-46. From Cast. Mai, p. 8,
9 : Arg. p. 13 : Upps. Frag. Goth. p.
I, 2.

xxvi. 1-3, 65-69. Cast. Mai, p. 10,
1 1 : Arg. p. T 4 : Upps. Frag. Goth.
p. 2, 3.—70-75.
Arg. : Upps. p. 14 :
Frag. p. 3, 4 : Cast. Mai, p. 10-12.
Cast. Mai, p. 10-13 • ^''g-
p. 14 : Upps. Frag. Goth. p. 3, 4.— 51e.

xxvii. 1.

Arg. diskritnoda for disskrituoda, as in
the last word of this verse.

Mark x. 39?/.

[daupyanda] w. in
Arg. an evident omission. See the latter
18.— 42j.
part of the note on Jn. x.
[l^aiei] w. in Arg.
reference.

Sec last note and

Luke vii. 32^. Arg. yan-ni evidently

for yah-ni.

ix. 50o. Ni ainshun auk ist mannc,
saei ni gawaurkyai niaht in namin mein-
amma, Literally and in the order of the

non faciat potentiara [virtutem, mira-
cula] in nomine meo.
This passage is
not found in the Greek MSS. but in
some Latin versions.
in the
parallel passage of St. Mark ix. 39,
where the Vulgate has — " Nemo est

It

is

enim, qui faciat virtutem in nomine
meo."
xiv. 31i/.— Gabelentz and Lobe, p.
133, note to 311;, assert that—du wig-

anna of Arg. " Sine dubio falsum, pro
du wigana ad helium, qui est dativus
vocis wigans helium.^'
Upps. thinks
the reading of Arg. may be retained ;
is, therefore, adopted in our text.
it
Though his remarks are too long for
insertion, we give the following quota-
tion, and refer to his note for particu-
"Quid si Codicis lectio ipsa per
lars.
se proba est, dummodo probe explicetur]
Nos verbum pro verbo reddimus : aut
quis rex iens mere contra aliian regeiii
ad movendum 1. quatiendum 1. pellendum
sc. eum, nee. 1. profecto, nonne sedens
antea cogitat ....'? Upps. p. 74,
note on line 6, 7.

XV. 22i. Arg. bringi)?, for briggi[>.

236. Arg. bringandans, for briggandans.

John i. 29a-j. Taken from Skeir-
p. 4, line 3-6 ; and p. 37,
eins,
line 14, 15 : Upps. Frag. Goth. 8vo. p.
15,10-13.

4to.

7 ;

'^ntl

iii. 3a-m. From Skcireins, p. 7, 20-
25; and p. 39, 10-12 :
L'pps. Frag.
Goth. p. 21, 4-10.
^a-p. Skeir. p. 8,
11-17 ; and p. 39, 18-21 : also p.
8,
P- 40, 4-6 : Upps.
25-P- 9»
Frag. Goth. p. 20, 2-8 : also p.
20,
5a- q. Skeir. p. 9, 16-22 ; and
16-23.
p. 40, 11-13 : Upps. Frag. Goth. p. 21,
4-10.— 23a-^. Skeir. p. 11, 1-4 ; and
p. 41, 1-2 : Upps. Frag. Goth. p. 22,
14-17.—24a-/i-. Skeir. p.,11, 4-7 ; and
p. 41, 3-4 : Upps. Frag. Goth. p. 22,
17-20.—25a-/?;.
Skeir. p. 11, 24-25,
and p. 12, 1-3; and p.
41, 12-13:
Upps. Frag. Goth. p. 23, 1 2-1 6.
26a-r.
Skeir. p. 15, 10-17 ; and p. 43, 5-7 :

—

—
—
—

—

—

—

—

—

St. John iii. 29.-xviii. 37.]

GOTHIC NOTES.

—

573

Upps. Frag. Goth. p. 26, 19-25, &c.
2da-e, 30a-/ Skeir. p. 15, 1-4 ; and
43, I, 2 : Upps. Frag. Goth. p. 26,
10-13.—31a-/ Skeir. p. 16, 20, 21 ;
and p. 43, 21 : Upps. Frag. Goth. p. 27,
31g-j. Skeir. p. 17, 16-17 '*
29-30.
and 44, 9 : Upps. Frag. Goth. p. 28,
31k-m. Skeir. p. 17, 6; and
20, 21.
p. 44, 1 1 : Upps. Frag. Goth. p. 28, 23.
—32a-m. Skeir. p. 17, 20-24 ; and
p. 44, I J-14 : Upps. Frag. Goth. p. 28,
24-28.

V. 21a-o. Skeir. p. 20 ; and p. 45 :
Upps. Arg. p. 1 9 ; and Frag. Goth. p.
22a-k. Skeir. p. 20; and p.
31, 2-7.
45 : Upps. Arg. p. 19 ; and Frag. Goth,
23a-g. Skeir. p. 21, 18
p. 31, 16-19.
-20 ; and p. 46 : Upps. Arg. p. 19 j
and Frag. Goth. p. 32, 12-14.
35a-o.
Skeir. p. 23, 17-22 ; and p. 47 : Upps.
Arg. p. 19 ; and Frag. Goth. p. 34, 19-
S6a-dd. Skeir. p.
20, and p. 35, 1-4.
23, &c. and p. 47 : Upps. Arg. p. 19;
Frag. Goth. p. 35, 5-15.
31a~i. Skeir.
p. 25, 9-12 ; and p. 48 : Upps. Arg. p.
19; and Frag. Goth. p. 36, 16-19.
37j-r. Skeir. p. 26 ; and p. 48 : Upps.
Arg. p. 19 ; and Frag. Goth. p. 37, 12-
38a-p. Skeir. p. 26, 7-12; and
14.
p. 48 : Upps. Arg. p. 19; and Frag.
Goth. p. 37, 15-20. — 45a-o. With a
tlie Codex Arg. begins again, and is per-
fect to ch. viii, except the omission of
V. 39 ch. vi : part of v. 29, and v. 53
ch vii.

vii. 41*. Arg. has distinctly ])U, for

))au. Upps. p. 24, line 11 in the note.

X. ISf-k.

Omitted in Arg.

There
can scarcely be any doubt as to the re-
stored passage, within brackets, when
it is seen under the Greek, and between
the two lines now in Arof. thus,

voeis atpci avriqv an
€fJov, aAA eyco TLOrjui, avTrjv an
ffxavTOv,

Ni whashun nim)> ]?o af
[mis, akei ik lagya ]>o af]
mis silbin.

Here the first two lines of the Gothic
ending with |?o af, and the next two be-
ginning with mis, the eye seems to have
caught the lower ]>o
af, and then to
have naturally gone on to mis silbin, in-
stead of mis, akei &c. omitting the whole
Those, who have
line within brackets.
had much experience in copying MSS.
know the tendency they have had to
The restored line was first
such errors.
suggested by Dr. Marshall in 1665, p.
469, approved by subsequent editors,
especially by Gab. Lob. and adopted by
Upps. Mass. and others.

that given in the text.

xi. 25no. The reading of Arg. is
Upps. defends

it in a long note, p. 31, 32. — Mass.

alters the text to jjauhyabai gadaujjnijj,
in Greek k&v dnoOdvTj, and the Vulgate
etiam si raortuus fuit.

xii. la. From Arg. fol. 75, i.
xviii. 37^. [qa]?] is omitted in Arg.

—

—
—

NOTES ON

THE ANGLO-SAXON VERSION.

Title, p. 2, column 2.—Godspell is

derived from god good, and spell narra-
It has exactly
tion, message, tidings.
the same meaning as the Greek euay-
well, good, and ayyeXXco
yeXiov, from €V
to bear a message, to bring tidings or
news.

The Anglo-Saxon Text is from the
MS. in Corpus Christi College, Cam-
bridge, No. CXL. of Nasmith's Catal.
In Wanley's Catal. p. 116, col. i, the

ajre of this MS. is stated to be—" Paulo
ante Conquisitionem Anglise descriptus."
A reference is made to it, in the follow-
ing notes, by B., which is the first
letter of Bene't, for some time the
colloquial name of Corpus Christi Col-
Some readings and correct in-
lege.
flections of words, with their more usual
orthography, have been taken from the
invaluable MS. li. 2. 11, in the Cam-
bridge University Library, and referred
to in the notes, by the letter C.
This
Cambridge MS. of the Anglo-Saxon
Gospels is remarkable for its adherence
to the "West-Saxon grammatical forms
and orthography.
Wanley, in p. 152,
col. I, says " Circa tempus Conquisi-
tionis Anglite scriptus."
It is supj^osed,
however, that both B and C are earlier
than the dates assigned to them by
Wanley ; probably B was written about
The Anglo-Saxon rubrics, in
A.D. 995.
the foHowing notes, are all copied from C,
and compared with 0, the Anglo-Saxon
MS. of the Gospels in the Bodleian
The Anglo-
Library, Oxford, No. 441.
Saxon Ivubrics do not exist in Band H.
They could not be retained in the body
of our Anglo-Saxon Text, as they stand

in C, without deranging the parallel
order of the verses, and the loss of
much space. An obelisk f is, therefore,
placed in the Text, where the Rubrics
begin, referring to the chapter and verse,
where they will be found in the following
notes.

Matt, i. 18a. Dys Godspel gebyra))
on myde-wyntres msesse-aefen. C.
That
is, the Rubric of the Cambridge MS. li
2. II, in the University Library.—2bfg.

ii. la. Dys sceal on twelftan dseg. C.

[od dset] from Bushw.
lOh. hig C.— 13a. Dys Godspel sceal on
cllda [MS. cylda] nuesse-dfeg. C.
Dys sceal on twelftan sefen. C.

19a.

iii. la. Dys sceal on Wodnes daeg,
on doere |>ryddan wucan ser ^lyddan
wyntra. C.—13a. Dys sceal on Wodnes

dseor ofer twelftan dcTfj. C.

iv. la. Dis Godspel sceal on halgan

daeg. C.—3e. costnind B. for costniend,
or for costnigend of C.—12a. Dis sceal

on Frige daeg ofer twelftan dieg. C.
15a-^. This verse is from the Bushw.
It is not in B. C. H. O. nor in the
Royal MS. Brit. Museum I. A XIV;
but it is found in the Lindisfarne MS.
as well as in the Rushworth. — 18a. Dis
Godspel sceal on Andreas ma^sse-dseg.
C.—23a. Dis sceal on Frige da?g, on
dsere J>ryddan wucan ofer twelftan da?g.
C.

V. la. Dis Godspel gebyra|> to ealra

halgena ma^ssan. C.—4. Tyndale trans-

lated from the Greek, and has the same
order of the verses, as our English ver-
The Anglo-Saxon and AVycliflfe,
sion.
following the Vulgate, have transposed
The verses retain
the verses 4 and 5.

—

—

—

—
—
—

—

—

T. Matt. v. 4.-xvi. 13.] ANGLO-SAXON NOTES.

—
—

—
—
—

:

575

tlie original order of eacli version ; but,
for facility of reference, the verses are
numbered to agree with Tyndale, and

Godspel sceal on done feorjjan Sunnan

our authorised version.—46. B. has synt
from V. 3 to 14, and in most other
places, but synd is the regular form,
is adopted from C.—17a. Dis
and it
Godspel sceal on done oderne Wodues
dcTg ofer Pentecosten. C. — 20a. Dis
da?g ofer Pentecosten. C. — 25a. Dis
Godspel sceal on Wodnes daeg, on dsere
};ryddan wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.
31a. Dis sceal on Wodnes daeg, on doere
XVI. wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.
S8ab.
Ge gehyrdon C, p. 15, 10 : gehyrdon
ge B.—42i. wylle C : omitted by B.
and 0. — 43a. Dis sceal on Wodnes
i^^^g, on daere syxteo))an wucan ofer
Pfntecosten ; and on Frige dajg innan
dsere cys-wucan. C.

vi. 7/.

nellon C :

nellen 0, Bl :
nelle B, H.—Ila6. Urne ge B, O.—
16a. Dys gebyra); to caput jejuni! [capud
ieiunii MS. p. 17.] on Wodnes dseg. C.
—24a. Dys sceal on done syxteojjan

Sunnan dseg ofer Pentecosten. C.
vii. la. Dys sceal on done feorj^an
Sunnan dseg ofer Pentecosten. C.— 7a.
Dys Godspel sceal to Gang-dagon. C.
15a. Dys Godspel gebyra|) on daere
nygo})an wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.
28a. Dys sceal on done j^ryddan Sun-
nan daeg ofer Epiphanian. C.
Hselnd B. —

viii. Id. Haeleud C :

14a. Dis gebyraj) on Frige daeg, on
dsere twa and twentugo|>an wucan ofer
Dis sceal on
Pentecosten.
Wodnes daig, on daere feorjjan wucan
ofer twelftan daeg. C.—23a. Dis sceal

C. — 19a.

on done feorjjan Sunnan daeg, ofer twelft-
an daeg. C.

ix. la. Dis Godspel sceal on Sun-
nan dwg, on daere twentugo|7an wucan
3abc. Da cwanlon
ofer Pentecosten. G.
suine. G : Da cwaedon hig. B.— 9a. Dis
Godspel sceal on Sec. Matheus manssc-
aefen. G.—14a. Dis sceal on Frige daeg,
on daire odre Eastcr-wucan, G. — 14.h.
G : duss B.
15ii-kk on dam datruni
from Vetus Italica.— 17^}'. Dis sceal on
Sunnan dajg, on du-TC fif and twcntugo-

18b.
25h. code C. p. 28,

Jjan wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.
he C : he w. B.
18, 0, E 1 : geode B, H.—27a. Dis sceal
on Wodnes daeg, on daere xiii. wucan
ofer Pentecosten. G.

X. 16a.

Dis Gcdspel sceal to man-
egra Martyra maesse-daege. C.
19 cd.
hig and G : w. B.—26/ Dys Godspel
gebyraj? to anes Confessores maesse-daege.
C.
37a. Dys Godspel gebyraj) to anes Mar-
tyres maesse-daege. C.

Sli. spearwan C: spearuan B.

xi. 2a. Dys gebyraj? on daere serran

[arran C] wucan ser Myda-wyntra. G.
7v. westen C, p. 35, 21 : wesden B.
20a. Dys Godspel gebyraj? on Frige
daeg, on dsere j?rytteoJ?an wucan ofer
Pentecosten. C. — 25a. Dys sceal on
Wodnes daeg, on daere syxtan wucan
ofer Pentecosten. C.

xii. la. Dys sceal on Frige [Fryge
C] daeg, on dasre eahtojian wucan ofer
Pentecosten. C. — 14a. Dys sceal on
Wodnes daeg, on daere xiiii. wucan ofer
Pentecosten. G.— 22a. Dys sceal on
done j?ryddan Sunnan daeg innan Lenct.
C.— 30a. Dys sceal on Wodnes daeg,
on daere twelftan wucan ofer Pente-
costen. G.—38a. Dys sceal on Wodnes
—49^-^ taken from Mk. iii. Sij-q.
C : s£ewere H.—43^-r. G,
Bl.—44a. Dys Godspel sceal to Sea.
Agnan maessan. C.
xiv. 9o, &c. w. B, C, 0, H, Ptl—22a.
Dys Godspel sceal in octabas Petri et
Pauli. C.—31c?. and the clause w. B, C,

xiii. 3m. saedere B, 0, PJ : sawere
: w. B, H,

daeg, on daere forman Lencten wucan. C.

O, H, Bl.

XV. la. Dys Godspel

gebyraj? on
done j?ryddan Wodnes daeg innan Lenct-
ene. G.— 3/ cwjej? C : w. B, 0, H, Bl.
—8rj. w. B, G, O, H, Bl.— 156/ and
cwaij? G, H : w. B. 0, Ul—Wj. stala C
stale O, B, H :
w. Bl.—21a. Dys G6d-
spel gebyraj> on done forman punrcs
daeg innan Lenctene. C. — 32a. Dys
G6(ls])cl gel>yraj? on da.TC cahtoJ?an wucan
ofer Pentecosten. C.

xvi. la Dys sceal on Wodnes daeg,
on drere cahtoj?an wucan ofer Pentecost-
en. C.— 13a. Dys Godspel gebyraj? on

—

—

:

—
—

ANGLO-SAXON NOTES.

[St. Matt. xvi. 14.-xxi. 8.

576
Petres msesse-dseg. C. — 14o. witegena
Rl : wytegena C : witegyna B,
egan H.—24a. Dys Godspel sceal on
See. Laurentius msesse-dseg. C. — 28a.
Dys Bceal on Sneternes dneg, on dsere
forman Leneten-wuean. C.

: wit-

xvii. 10a. Dys seeal on Frige daeg,
on dsere fiftan wucan ofer Pentecosten,
C.—14a. Dys sceal on Wodnes daeg, to
dam fsestene ser liairfestes emnyhte. C.

msesse-dseg. C.

xviii. la. Dys sceal on See. Michael es
lOn. and thp clause w.
B, C, H, O and Bl.—15a. Dis sceal on
Tiwes da3g, on dsere j^ryddan Lencten
wucan. C.— 23a. Dys sceal on dsere
xxiii. wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.

xix. 1271-v. From the margin of C
w. B, H, O and Rl.—27a. Dys sceal to

See. Paulus msesse-dsege j and to See.
Benedictus. C.

B.

XX. la. Dys sceal on done Sunnan
dseg, de man belyc}? Alleluia. C. p. 67,
See Rubric Mk. iv. ^h.— 9c. de C:
23.
dse B : da H.—17a. Dys Godspel ge-
byra|? on Wodnes dssg, on dsere odre
Lencten-wucan. C.—21/. du C, H : tu
22u.—Tyndale has the following
clause [x-u]—and to be baptised with
the baptim that Y shalbe baptised with,
—because it
is in Greek, from which
It is omitted by
Tyndale translated.
the Vulgate, and therefore by Wycliffe,
as he translated from the Vulgate.
It

is also w. in Anglo-Saxon.—28. Be-

tween this and the next verse, the fol-
lowing interpolation occurs in B, C, H,

O.—Ge wylniaj) to gedeonne on ge-
hwsedum |>inge, and beon gewanod on
dam msestan jjinge.
Witodlice, doune
ge to gereorde geladode beo]?, ne sitte
ge on dam fyrmestan sctlum, de-la?s de
arwurdre wer sefter de cume, and se
husbonda hate de arisan ^nd ryman
dam odrum, and dii beo gescynd.
Gif
dii sitst on gereorde, on dam ytemestan
setle ; and a^fter de cym}) oder gebeor,
and se ladigenda cwede to de,— Site
innor, leof : donnc by}> de arwurdlicor
donne de man uttor scufe.
That is
literally, in English,— Ye seek to become
great in a small matter, and to
ininished in the greatest matter.

Verily,

he

wlien ye shall he hidden to a feast, sit ye
not in the first seats, lest a more worthy
man come after thee, and the householder
hid thee rise and make room for the other,
and thou he put to shame. If thou sittest
at a feast, in tlie outermost seat ; and
after thee cometh another guest, and tlie
hidder say to tliee,—Friend, sit nearer :
then shalt thou he more Iwnourable than
the man put into the outer \^seat'\.
The
whole of this parable, except the first
sentence, will be found in ch. xiv. 7-10
Junius and Marshall's
of St. Luke.
Evan. Goth, et A. S. p. 496.
This in-
terpolation is not contained in the Vul-
gate, but it is found entire in the MS.
of the Gospels, which Gregory the Great
sent into England by St. Augustine in
From that time to
the sixth century.
the Reformation it was carefully pre-
served in the Bihliotheca Gregoriana in
St. Augustine's Abbey, at Canterbury.
At the dissolution of religious houses,
it came first into the hands of Lord
Hatton, then of Sir Robert Cotton, of
Cunington, Huntingdonshire, where it
was in 1602; as the latter name, place,
and date are written on the ^IS.
It
its way into
afterwards
the
Bodleian
great
still kept with the utmost
treasure is
I am indebted to Geo. Waring,
care.
Esq., M.A., for the following verbatim
copy of this interpolation, taken from
the Bodleian MS. Codex August. 857
" Vos autem qu^eritis de
D. 2. 14.
modico crescere, et de maximo minui.
Cum autem introeritis ad cenam vocati,
nolite recumbere in superioribus locis,
ne forte dignior te superveniat, et ac-
cedens is qui te invitavit, dicat tibi,
Adhuc inferius accede,, et confundaris.
Si autem recubueris in inferiori loco ;
et advenerit humilior te, dicet tibi qui
te invitavit,—Accede adhuc superius ;
et crit tibi hoc utilius." Fol. 23, col. i.
29a. Dys sceal on Sseternes daeg, on
dsere Peutecostenes wucan to dam Ymb-
rene. C.

Library, where

found

this

xxi. la. Dys sceal on dsere feorjjan
wucan, serMydda-wyntra.C.— 87;.streow-
cdou C. p. 72, I : streoweden H : strcNV-

—
—
—
—

—

—

—

—

—
—

577

: strewedon Rl.

St. Matt. xxi. 16.-St. Mark x. 17.] ANGLO-SAXON NOTES.
odun B : strewodon
—16m;. sacerda B, C, H, 0, and other
MS. evidently an error of the scribes
for sucendra, v. Ps. 8, 3, where Spelman
has sucengra.—23a. Dys sceal on Wod-
fiftan wucan ofer
nes dseg, on dsere
311. seftera B, C : yldra
Pentecosten. C.
S3d. Dys sceal on dsere
as in V. 28.
odre wucan innan Lenctene, on Frige
daeg. C.

I, in a small and later hand, at the top
of the page. H has Da saede se kyng to
In B and
dan de on his swidren waren.

w.—39o^ C p. 90, 12 : w. B. O.
xxvi. 2a. Des Passio sceal on Palm-

xxii. 8^. gearwe C p. 76, 13 and
O : gearewe H : earwe B.—15a. Dis
Godspel sceal on xxiii. wucan ofer Pen-
This rubric is written in a
tecosten.
recent hand, on the margin of C. p. 77,
and followed, in the same hand, by
Abeuntes pharisei consilium inierunt, ut
caperent Jesum in sermone.—34a. Dys
sceal on dsere wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.
xxiii. 5m. heals-bec O : heals-boec
B : hals-bsec C : hals-bec H.
13a. Dys
sceal on Frige dseg, on dsere nygej^an
wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.—14. This
verse is w. in A. S. and in Codex Au-
gustinius, Bod. 857. D. 2. 14. fol. 27,
col. 2, but it is in the Vulgate ; another
proof that the Anglo-Saxon Version was
not made from the Vulgate, and that
the Codex Augustin. which Gregory the
Great ^ent to England was not the
correct Vulgate version of St. Jerome,
but one of the old Italic versions.

See Note to ch. xx. 28. — 34a. Dys
dseg. C. — 376 and cl. Jerusalem H :

Godspel sceal on See Stefanes msesse-

Gerusalem B.

xxiv. 30s. cumendne B, III : cum-
ende C, H : cumyndne 0.— 30 y. genypon
C. p. 85, 1 1 : genipod B, O.— 39c, nyst-
on C. p. 86, 5 : nystan III: nysten H :
42a. Dys Godspel sceal
riys}jon B, O.
to maeuiges [maenies MS.] Confessores
maesse-dsege. C.—43w. ge|)afigan O : ge-
fafian C, H : gejjafigen B.—46a. eadig
C, H : eadi B.

XXV. la. Dys sceal to haligra fscmncna
14a. Dys Godspel ge-
maesse-djjfige. C.
ljyra|j on See. Syluestres msrjsse-(lajge,and
to 6d ra Confessores. C.
31a. Dys sceal
on Monan daeg, on forman faestcn-daeg.
C.—34a. Donne cwi|> se cyning to dum
do on hys swidran healfe beoj). C. p. 91,

Sunnan dseg. C.
xxviii. la. Dys sceal on Easter-
sefen. C.— 8a. Dis sceal on Frige dseg,
on dsere odre Easter-wucan. C.— 16a.
Dis sceal on Frige daeg, innan dsere
Easter-wucan. C.

C has the following note after 20W.—
Finit Amen. Sit sic hoc hie interim.
Ego, ^Ifricus, scripsi hunc librum in
Monasterio Bad])onio,
et dedi Briht-
Qui scripsit uiuat in
woldo Preposito.
pace, in hoc mundo et in futuro seculo,
et qui legit legator in eternum. C. p. 88.

Mark i. 40a. Dys sceal on Wodnes
dseg, on dsere fifteo]?an wucan ofer Pente-
costen. C.

iv. 3b. Dis sceal on dsere wucan
aefter dam de man belycj? Alleluia. C.
p. 116, 4 ; See Kubric Mt. xx. la.

V. la. Dis sceal on Frige dseg, on
dsere seofej^an wucan ofer Pentecosten.
C.

vi. 17a. Dys Godspel sceal innan

haerefeste to See. lohannes msessan. C.
45a. Dis sceal on Saeternes dseg aer
halgan daege. C.

vii. la. Dys sceal on Wodnes daeg,

on daere jjryddan Lencten-wucan. C.
31a. Dis Godspel sceal on daere J?ryt-
teojjan wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.

viii. la. Dis Godspel gebyrajj on
dsere ehtoj^an wucan ofer Pentecosten.
C.— 27a. Dys Godspel sceal on See.

Petres msesse-dsege. C.

ix. 2a. Dis sceal on Saetern-dseg,
on daere forman firstcn -wucan. C.—17a.
Dis sceal to dam Ymb-renc innan haere-
feste, on Wodnes daeg. C.
38a. Dis
sceal on Wodnes dieg, on daere nygojjan
wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.

x. 13a. Dys sceal on Frigc daeg, on
daere syxtun wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.
—17a. Dis sceal on Wodnes daeg, on

daere Bcofejmii wucan ofer Pentecosten.

pp

—

578

—

—

—
—

—

—

ANGLO-SAXON NOTES. [St. Mark x. 46.-St. Luke xv. 11.

4:6a. Dys gebyra)> on Sunnan dseg

C.
ser halgaD daege. C.

xi. la. Dys gebyra)) feower wucon
ser Myddan wintran. C.— 8;. Tlie MSS.
bogas.—11a. Dis sceal on done feorjjan

have boceras, an error of the scribes for

Frigfe dses ofer Pentecosten. C.

xii. 13a. Dys sceal on dsere xxiiii.
28a. Dys
wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.
Godspel sceal on Fnge djeg, on dsere
twelftan wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.

xiv. la. Des Passio gebyraj? on Tiwes

daeg, on daere Palm-wucan. C.

XV. 40r-v. From C. p. i6i, i \f-\2a.
—47a. Dys Godspel gebyra]) on Easter-

dseg. C.

xvi. 9a. Dys Godspel gebyra]? on
Wodnes dseg, on daere odre [odere MS.]
Easter-wucan. C.—14a. Dis sceal on

punres daeg, innan daere Gang-wucan.
C.

punres daeg innan Lenctene, and to
Pentecosten on Saeternes daeg. C.

V. la. Dis sceal on done syxtan

Sunnan daeg ofer Pentecosten. C.—17a.

Dis sceal on Frige daeg, on daere Pente-
costenes wucan. C.

vi. 36a. Dis gebyra]) on done fiftan

Sunnan daeg ofer Pentecosten. C.

—24/?. hwig C, p. 190, II.

vii. 11a. Dys sceal on done seofen-
teo])an Sunnan daeg ofer Pentcosten. C.
25v-z. See
36a. Dis Godspel sceal to
Marshall.
dam Ymb-rene innan haerfeste on Frige
daeg. C.

viii. 40a. Dis sceal on Frige daeg,
on dsere Pentecostenes wucan, to dam
Ymb-rene. C.—49^'-^. See Marshall.
ix. la. Dys sceal on punres daeg, on
daere Pentecostenes wucan. C. — 12a.
Dis sceal on Wodnes daeg, on daere
to dam Ymb-
Pentecostenes vmcan,
rene. C.

Luke i. la. Dis Godspel gebyra]^ on
C. — 26a.
Midde-sumeres maesse-sefen.
Dis sceal on Wodnes daeg, to dam Ymb-
rene eer Mydda-wyntran. C.—39a. Dis
gebyra]) on Frige daeg to dam ylcan faes-
tene. C.—56a. Dis gebyra]) on Myd-

sumeres maesse-daeg. C.

ii. la. Dis sceal on Mydde-wyntres
maesse-nyht, to daere forman maessan. C.
— 21a. Dis sceal on done ehto])an maesse-
daeg to Myddan wyntra. C.— 33a. Dis
sceal on done Sunnan daeg, betweox
Mydde-wintres maesse-daege, and twelftan
daege. C.

iii la. Dis gebyra)) on Saetern-daeg,

.

to sew-faestene, ser Myddan wyntra. C.
. se waes Nazareth. The
2St-x. Helies .
scribe, in abruptly breaking off the gene-
alogy, may have confounded Helies with
Hselend, and have added, se waes Naza-
reth, from a natural association of the Sa-
viour's name with his residence at Naza-
reth, Mt. xxi, II.—As to the number of

generations, Beza observes, in a note on
this passage. In vetustissimo Latino co-

dice lego,— " Generationes septuaginta

quinque." Marsliall, p. 503.

to anes

X. la. Dis Godspel sceal

Apostoles maessan. C.— 23a. Dis sceal
on daere feowerteol^an wucan ofer Pente-
costen. C.— 38a. Dis sceal to Assump-
tione See. Marie, and Saetern-dagum be
Maria. C.

xi.

5/.

Dis sceal

to Gang-dagon
daege twegen dagas. C., p. 208, ^.—14a.
Dis Godspel gebyra]) on done ])ryddan
Sunnan daeg innan Lenctene. C.— 37a.
Dis Godspel gebyra]) on Frige daeg, on
daere teo])an wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.
xii. 11a. Dis sceal on Frige daeg
ofer Pentecosten. C.—35a. Dis Godspel

gebyra]) to maeniges Confessores maesse-
daege. C.

xiii. 6a. Dis Godspel sceal to dam
Ymb-rene innan haerefeste on Sietern-
da3g. C.

xiv. la. Dys Godspel gebjrra]) on
daere nygonteo])an wucan ofer Pente-
16a. Dys Godspel geb>TaJ)
costen. C.
on done ])ryddan Sunnan da^g ofer Pen-
25a. Dys Godspel sceal
tecosten. C.
to Scs. Hermetis and to Scs. Agustinus
mressan. C.

XV. la. Dys Godspel sceal on done
feor])an Sunnan daeg ofer Pentecosten. C.
—11a. Dys Godspel gebyra]) on Saeternes

iv. 38a. Dis sceal on done j)ryddan

daeg, on daere odre Lencten-wucan. C.

—

—

—

—
—
—

St. Luke xvi. 1.-St. John x. 11.] ANGLO-SAXON NOTES.

579

xvi. la. Dys Godspel gebyra]? on
dsere teo])an wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.
—10a. Dys gebyra}) on Wodnes dseg
on dsere teoj)an wucan [ucan MS.] ofer
Pentecosten. C.—19a. Dis Godspel ge-
byra]j on done oderne Sunnan dseg ofer
Pentecosten. C.

xvii. la. Dys Godspel gebyra]) on
done oderne Frige dseg ofer Pentecosten.
C.—11a. Dys gebyra)? on daere syxteoj^an
wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.

xviii. 10a. Dys gebyraj) on dsere

endlyftan wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.

xix. 12a. Dys Godspel sceal on See.
C. — 29 a. Dys
Gregorius msesse-dseg.
gebyra]) feower wucan serMiddan wyntra,
and on Palm-Sunnan-dseg. C.—41a. Dys

Godspel gebyra]? on dsere
wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.

endlyftan

XX. 27a. Dys Godspel sceal on

Wodnes dseg ofer Pentecosten. C.

xxi. 12^. The MSS. have syddan,
sylla}) is,

an evident error for syllan ;
therefore, adopted from Mk. xiii. 9.
20a. Dys Godspell gebyra)? on Wodnes
dseg on dsere xi. wucan [ucan MS.] ofer
Godspell, in this Ku-
Pentecosten. C.
bric, is written over the line in a much
smaller hand.—34a. Dys Godspel ge-

byra)? on Frige dseg, on dsere endleftan
The words
wucan ofer Pentecosten. C.
g-j in this Rubric are written above the
line in a much smaller hand.

xxii. la.

Des Passio

gebyraj? on

Wodnes dseg, on dsere Palm-wucan. C.
xxiv. 13a. Dys gebyra)? on oderne
Easter-dseg. C.—36a. Dys gebyra)? on

jjryddan Easter-dseg. C.

John i. \ah. On fruraan, C, O : On
frym))e, B : On anginne serest. H. 2cc/. on
fruman, Cot.—15a. Dys Godspel gebyraj?
J)rym wucon aer Myddan-wyntrau, on
done Frige dfcg. C.—19^! Dys gebyraj?
on done Sunnan da?g aer Myddan-wyn-
29a. Dys gebyra)? on done viii
tra. C.
dseg Godes ait-ywediiysse. G.—35a. Dys

Bceal on See. Andreas majsse-uifen. C.

ii. la. Dys Godspel sceal on Sunnan
dtcg, dsere odrc wucar ofer Epipliania

Domini. C.—12a. Dys Godspel gebyra)?
on dsere feor)?an wucan innan [ynnan
MS. p. 268, 17], Lengtene, on Monan
dseg. 0.

iii. la. Dys Godspel man sceal rsed-
an ofer Eastron, be dsere rode, and eft
ofer Pentecosten, on done forman Sun-
nan dseg. C.—16a. Dys sceal on oderne
Pentecostenes msesse-dseg. C.—25a. Dys
sceal on Wodnes dseg, on dsere ]?ryddan
wucan ofer Eastron. C.
iv. 6e. Dys sceal on Frige dseg, on
dsere iii. Lengten-wucan. C.—46o. Dys
Godspel gebyra]? ofer Pentecosten, on
dsere an and twentygo]?an wucan on
Sunnan dseg. C.

V. la. Dys Godspel sceal on Frige
dseg, on dsere forman Lengten-wucan. C.
—17a. Dys Godspel sceal on punres dseg,

on dsere feor)?an Lencten-wucan. C.
30a. Dys sceal on purs dseg, on deere
odre Lencten-wucan. C.

vi. la. Dys Godspel sceal on Myd-
lenctenes Sunnan dseg. C. — 27a. Dys
sceal on Frige dseg, on dsere forman
wucan sefter Epiphania Domini. C.
44a. Dys sceal on Wodnes dseg, on dsere
b^g. Dys sceal
Pentecostenes wucan. C.
anum dsege ser Palm-sunnau-dsege. C.

vii. la. Dys sceal on Tywes dseg, on

dsere fiftan wucan innan Lengtene. C.
14a. Dys sceal on Myd-lengtenes wucan,
on Tywes dseg. C.— 32j. Dys sceal on
Monan dseg, on dsere fyftan wucan in-
nan Lenctene. C.— 40a. Dys Godspel
sceal on punres [pures MS.] dseg, on
dsere fiftan wucan innan Lenctene. 0.
viii. la. Dys Godspel gebyraj? anum
dsege ser Myd-fsestene. C.— 12a. Dys
Godspel sceal on dsere Myd-fsestcnes
wucan, on Sseternes dseg. C.— 21/i. Dys
Godspel sceal on Monan da3g, on da3re
odre Lencten-wucan. C.—31a. Dys sceal
on punres dseg, on dsere forman Lengten-
wucan. C.—43^'-^. Taken from O : w.
in P> and C.—46a. Dys Godspel gebyrnj?
on Sunnan dicg, on diere fiftan wucan
innan Lenctene. C.

ix.

la. Dys G(3(lspel

gebyraj? on
Wodnes dirg, on Myd-fsustcnes wucan. C.
X. la.— i3y8 sceal on Tywes dajg, on
daire Pentecostenes wucan. 0.—11a. Dys

p p 2

—

—

—

—
—

—

—

—

580

ANGLO-SAXON NOTES.

sceal on Sunnan dseg, fcowertync nyht
15j-r. Copied from
uppan Eastron. C.
the left margin of C, p. 302, opposite
22a. Dys sceal
the II and 12th line.
on Wodnes dseg, innon dsere fiftan Lenc-
ten-wucan ; and to Cyric-halgungum. C.
xi. la. Dys sceal on Fryge daeg, on
Myd-faestenes wucan. C.—47a. Dys sceal
twam dagum ser Palm-sunnan dsege. C.
xii. la. Dys Godspel sceal on Monan
dseg, innan dsere Palm-wucan. C.—24a.
Dys sceal on Tywes dseg, on dsere Palm-
wucan. C.

xiii. la. Dys gebyra)? on punres dseg
ser Eastron. C.—14/-V. Omitted by B,
inserted here from C, p. 315, 6-8.
33a. Dys Godspel gebyra]) on Fryge
dseg, on dsere feor|)an wucan ofer East-
ron. C.

St. John x. 15.-xxi. 19.
have })ine synt mine.—lie.

1/-20 : B,
C has com, p. 327, 3 : B, O com.
llq.
Dys Godspel gebyraj) on Wodnes dseg,
on diere feor})an wucan ofer Eastron. C.
—11?\ On dsere tide se Hivlend beheold
hys leorning-cnihtas, and cwsej) :—This

is not in the Greek Text, nor in the
Vulgate of Jerome : it is an addition of
the Anglo-Saxon translator, and pre-
cedes Halega, in C, p. 327, 80-96 ; also
in B, H and 0.
llhh. Literally, that
tliey may be one, as [wyt] we two are
: the
one.
The Gothic is
Vulgate sicut et nos.
swaswe wit as we two. Thouirh Greek
has the dual voSi we two, it is not here
The Gothic and Anglo-Saxon
used.
sense most minutely and
give

The Greek has KaBcos T]fx€ls

the

clearly.

xiv. la. Dys Godspel gebyra|> to

xviii. la. Des Passio gebyraj) on

dsere msessan Philyppi and lacobi. C.
15a. Dys sceal on Pentecostenes msesse-
2Sh. Dys Godspel sceal on
sefen. C.
Pentecostenes msesse-dseg. C.

XV. la. Dys Godspel gebyraj) to See.
Uitalis msessan. C.—7a. Dys Godspel
sceal on Wodnes dseg
Domini. C.—12a. Dys gebyi-a]? to dsera
Apostola msesse-dagon. C. —17a. And
dys gebyra]) to dsera Apostola msesse-
dagon. C.—26a. Dys gebyra|> on Sun-

ofer Ascensio

nan dseg, ofer Ascensio Domini. C.

xvi. 5a. Dys Godspel sceal on Sun-
nan dveg, on dsere feorjjan wucan [ucan
MS.] ofer Eastron. C.—16a. Dys God-
s^^el gebyra]) ofer Eastron, twa wucan,
on Sunnan dseg. C.— 23^. Dys Godspel
sceal on done feorj^an Sunnan dseg ofer
Eastron. C.

xvii. la. Dys Godspel gebyraj) on
Wodnes dseg, on di^ere Gang-wucau to
dam uigilian. C.—lOc-e. From C, p. 327,

Langa-frige-dseg. C.

xix.

37a-e.

Written between the
lines II and 12 of C, p. 336.
In the
same verse over on-fsestnodon, is written,
in the same hand as a-e, sticodon stuck,

pierced.—386c. Written also in the same
hand between the lines 1 2 and 13 of C,
P- ^^^•
on dsere Easter-wucau. C.—11a.

XX. la. Dys sceal on Sseternes dseg,
Dis
Godspel gebyraj) on punres dseg, innan
da?re Easter-wucan [ucan MS.]. C.
19a. Dis Godspel gebyraj) seofon nyht
ofer Eastron. C.

xxi. la.

Dis Godspel gebyraj) on
Wodnes diieg, innan dsere Easter-^\1lcan
[ucan MS.]. C.— 15c/. Dis Godspell ge-
byraj) on Petres msesse-aefeu. C.—19??^.
Dys Godspel gebyraj) on See. lohannis
Euangelista [euuangelista MS. p. 342]
msesse-dseg. C.

—

NOTES ON

WYCLIFFE'S TEANSLATION.

The text of Wycliffe has been taken
from the first version, given in the 4to.
Edition, published at Oxford in 1850,
printed at the University Press, under
the editorial care of Sir Frederic Madden
and the Kev. Josiah Forshall, collated
with the original MS. N^. 369 of the
Douce
Bodleian
Library.

Collection

the

in

The following words in Italic are in
the body of the page of Wyclifie's trans-
They are, like our marginal
lation.
readings, explanatory of words, which
seemed to require elucidation.
In the
Douce MS. they are written in letters
of the same form as the other part of
the text ; but, for distinction, a red line
is drawn under them.
For the same
purpose, Sir Frederic Madden and Mr.
Forshall have printed them in the Italic
In their text of Matt. i. 26.
character.
after gendride, we find in Italic or bigate.
—and in v. 2 2aa. Racha, that is, a word
0/ scorn.—vi. 13W. Amen, that is, so be
it.— X. 39«. his soule, that is, temporal
Though these explanatory words
hjf.
could not be entirely excluded, as they
belong to the translation ; yet, if left in
the text, they would have expanded it
too much to harmonise with the other
versions. A small obelisk or dagger is,
therefore, placed in the text, where such
Italic words occur.
All these explana-
tory words arc given in the following
notes, in the Italic character.

Matt. i. 26. or bifjate.—19i. or ri-^t-
fvX.—19m. (rr lede Mr fertJuir. —2Qn. or
»v^euen.— 23t/;. or expound.
ii. I7. or vnJ8 men. — 16^. or dis-

ceyaed.

V. 4. Wycliffe,

iii. 2k. or cume ni'^e.—11^ or crist-
en.—12c. or fan.— 12ee. or that neuer
shal be quenchid.—IS-y. or left hym.
iv. 21aa. or beetynge.—23w. or ache,
—24c. or fame.
gate, places verse 5 before 4.—17c. or
deme.—llh. or distruye.—18m. that is,
leste lettre.— 19c?. or breketh.—22aa. that
is, a word of scorn.—2211. that is, a
word of dispisynge.— 247i. or acordid.
—31p. that is, a litil boke offorsakyng.
—47 ci?. or saluten.

following the Vul-

droue.

ix. 15^.

20t. or undirmyne nat.

vi. 13m. that is, so be it.

The Dox-
ology is omitted by Wycliffe, and the
Anglo-Saxon, because it was not in the
Vulgate.

vii. 3/! or a litil mote.— Ql. or pre-
ciouse stoonys.—13m. or dampnacioun.
—2Qy. or soond.
viii. 19c. or a man of lawe.—20h.
or borowis.—28cc. or wickid.—30 c. or
or husbonde. — 15m. or
mourne.—\Qi. or newe.—17*. or wijn
vesselis.—20h. or rennynge.— 28yy. or
^ea.—35w. or ache.
X. 12i. or salute ^ee.— 14<7. or citee.
—\Qp. or wijse bifore.—18c. or meyris.
—19e. or bitraie.— 25z. or thefadir of
meynee.—26j. or hid. — 39e. that is,
temporal lyf.—39w. that is, lif
xi. bz. or ben maad keepers of the
gospel.—12o. or violence.—19 0. or glot-
oun.—22^, 24o. or lesse peyne.— 2bbb.
or slce"^ men.—28n. or fulfdle.—30c. or
softe.— 30i. or eisy.
xii. 4n. or puttynge forth.—16/. or
knowen.— 25r/. or discouvfortid.— 27^.
or whoa ini'^t.— 282^. or amonge yiu.

182

xiii. Qg. or hrenden for hete.—Ylq.
or priuyte.—21l. that is, it lastith hot a
litil tyme.—2,bk, 2Ql, 27bb. or cokil.—
29 i. or coclis. — 30 z. or cockilis. —
or smale hundelis. — 32n. or
hraunchis.—S5y. or telle oute.— 36a;. or
cokelis. —3Sq. or cocklis.—55^. or car-

SOgff.

penter.

herberden.

NOTES ON WYCLIFFE. St. Matt. xiii. B.-St. Mark x. 14.
20s. or besauntis.— 2\l. or trewe.—27/!
or betaken.— 34?;. or take 3ee in posses-
sioun.— 34ee. or makynge.— 3bbb. or
xxvi. \0j. or sory.— 30c. or heri-
ynge.— 37o. or heuy.—38o. or abyde
5ee.—41^. or vnstable.—640. or fro this
tyme forth.—Qbf or to-rente.
xxvii. 2m. or clief iustice.-^3n. or
forthenkynge.— 5v. or a gnare.— 11/. or
domysman.—17w. or delyuere. — 19e. or
domysman.—\9gg. or sweuen.— 20j. or
counseiliden.—21p. or delyuerid.— 24;^.
or giltlesse.— 291;. or folden.—40c. or
fie to thee.—46w. or whi.— 48?. or vyne-
gre.— b\i. or rent. — 52^^ or v'eren
dead.— 59^. or lynnen cloth.— 63i. or
disseyuour.—66e. or wardiden.— 66/i.
xxviii 1^. or holiday.— 14A. or ins-

or seelinge.

aundide.

xiv. le. that is, prince of thefourthe

part.— Sd. or warnyd.—22d. or com-
XV. 2d. or hreken.—2f. or statutis.
«— 6r. or idyl.
xvi. 3j. or sorwful.—VI k. that is,
the sane of culuer.—\Saa. or strengthe.
— 235. or vndirstondist nat.— 25h, and

25r. that is, his lyf.

seegis.

xvii. 2 c. or turnyd into an other
lickenesse.—Ylg. or out of the feith.—
2 See. or rent.— 2bll. or other mennys
sones.— 21ff. that is, a certeyn ofmoneye.
xviii. 15 w. or snyhhe.— 27/. or suf
fride hym.
xix. 3t. or forsake.—bq. or drawe,
'— 6^. or knytte to gidre.—24t. or eysier.
— 28^. or gendrynge a^ein. — 28nn. or
XX. lo. or by the morwe.— 9p. that
is, euery man oo peny.— 22j. or shulen
axe.—28s. or lif.
xxi. bn. or meke. — 91. that is, I
preie, saue.—16z. that kunnen Qiat speke.
— 29l. or forthenkynge. — SSdd. or
sette it toferme.—31 n. or drede.
or recken nat. — 7o. or
distruyde.—16i. that ben men of Er-
oudis. — 16ee. or charge.—Yip. or em-
perour.— Vlq. or tribut.
xxiii. 4A. or that mown nat he horn.
— bq. that ben smale scrowis.— 15s. that
is, a conuertid to '^oure ordre.—16ee. or
is detour.—23u. or of more charge.—
23hh. ornedide.—33c. orburiownyngus.
•— 33e. that sleen her modris.—34^. or
writeris.— 38i. or forsaken.
xxiv. 10; . or ech otJter.— 22j. that
is, mankynde.— 2Qt. or placis. — 30o.
or iynagis.— 31ee. or endes.— 32k. or
braunche.—40^?. or forsaken.—45i. or
war.—48?J. or taryhige.
XXV. lu. or husbonde.—Ix. or wijf.—
5c. or housbonde.—15g. or besauntis.—

xxii. 5c.

tise.

Mark i. lu. or vnbynde.—15p. or do
^ee penaunce.— 28c. or tything.— 30^.
or lay.—45i. or puplislie.
ii. 21y. or newe. — 21s. or j^cicche.—

22^, or wyne vesselis.

iii.

lOi;.

or

woundis. — 12/.

or

knowen.

or expownid.

iv. 4/>. or of the eire.—lOe. or by
hym silf— llo. or pryuite. — 17/. that
is, lasten a lityl tyme.— 28/. or grene
corn.—29o. or hook.— 32e. or quykened.
— 32s. or erbis. — 34^. or by hem self.
V. 3h. or biriels.—4,z. or make tame.
—13s. or haste.— 20^, that is, a citntree
of ten citees.—29w. or sikenesse.—41j9.
vi. 3f or carpenter.— 9d. that hen
opyn aboue.— 21a:. or gretteste.
vii. 2n. that is, not waischun.— 3^'.
or statutis.—18j. or vnwyse. — 226. or
ouer hard kepynge of goodis.—24cc. or
he priuy.— 31/i. or coostis.
viii. 2p. or abyden.—8n. or smale
gobatis.—Wh. or axe.— 35^. and 35s.
ix. 3r. or walkere of cloth. — 18m.
x. 2p. or forsake.— 14/i. or vnwor-

that is, his lyf.
or vometh. — 49^*. or maad sauori.

St. Mark x. 25.-St. John xii. 37.] NOTES ON WYCLIFFE.
thili.— 25c. or esyer.—42w. or hen seyn.
—425. or hen lordis.-^^bv, or lyf.—
45 w. or a^en hiyng.

prisouns.

583

xxi. 2l. ethir a ferthing.—\2u. ether
xxii. 7n. that is, sacrifice ofpask.—
25^. or lordschipen.— 44c. ether an"
gwische.—64c. or hidden.
xxiii. 4t6y. ether diede.—50^. ether

xi. 8m. or hraunchis.

ZZl. or mynde.

xii. If. or in parahlis.—4^. or re-
prouyngis.—6y. or drede with reuerence.
—7g. or to gidere.—30aa. or myi^te.—*
xiii. 20k. or mankynde.— 20aa. or
maad schort.
xiv. \h. withow^ten sourdow^.— 4/.
or heuyli.—13cc. or come a^ens ^ou.—
14v. or etyng place.—26c. or heriynge.
—34o. or abide 56.—44^/. or queyntely.
—65dd. or hoffatis.
XV. Iv. that is, dehaat in cytee.—
13/. or put hym on tlie cros.—15^. or
hetun.— 22^. or expowned.—25/. that
men clepen rnidrun.—28^. or ordeyned.
—32w. orfals repref.— 33c^. ormydday.
—33r. that is, noon.—S4.W. or wherto,
—S7h. or sente out the hreth.— 38g'. or
hynethe.—43/. that hadde ten men vndir
him.—44?. or hrow^t to.
xvi. 5y. or greetli aferd.— 80. or gon
in to hem.— 12o. or figure.—16^. or
cristenyd. — ISl. or deedli thing, that

hryngith deeth.

doumhe.

Luke i. 1966. or telle. — 20/ or
ii. In. or noble.—3^. or knowleching.
iii. Qc. or man.
V. \j. or camien faste.
vi. 32J.

ethir iluink. — 41;. othir a

mot.

vii. 2g. that hadde an hundrid men
vndir him. — 22uu. ether hen Tnaad
keperis of the gospel.—34m. ether glotoun.
—41i. ethir vsv/rer,
X. 121. other lasse peyn£.— 19;. othir
tredinge.— 27«. or lyf.
superfiu.—42m. etiter erhe.

spirit. — 41/.

XV. 8/ ether besawntis. — 12o. ethir
xvi. \p. ethir a haily. — 19^;. ether

xi. 20i. ether

whit silk.— 2Qi. etiter deptJte.

ether

catel.

xviii. 6/ or disespful.
xix. 20p. etJicr swcting cloth.

hauynge ten vndir him,

xxiv. Hi. ether errour.

tokene.

haliday.

14c.
man.

John i. 1/ that is, Goddis sone.—
that is, Goddis sone. — 14/ or
ii. 1/. or town.—8m. that is, prince
in the hous of thre stagis. — 18/ or
iii. 18^. or dampnyd.—20u. or vn-
dirnomun.—22^. or crisfenede.—25c.
or axyng.—25^1. or clensing.—26/ or
maistir.— 29e. or wyf.—29^. or hose-
honde.—30^. or maad lesse.
iv. 5p. or feeld.—6^. or feynt.—Qz.
or vndurn.—21cc. or worschipe.—31/ or
maistir.—35aa. or cuntrees.—36/ or
mede.— 44w. or worschip.— 45 &6. or
V. 135. or sett.—35h. or '^yuynge li^t.
vi. 14t. or myracle.—2Qu. or my-

—37w. orfoorme.
raclis.—27^;. or Tnarkede.
—^i. or priuy.—14/ or goynge bitwixe.
—235. or wraththe.— 35;3r. or distroy-
7c?. or contynuede. — 19^.. or
knowen.—2hn. or thefirste of al thing.
—42r. or cam forth.—b\q. or taaste.
ix. 2/ that is, Maistir. — 65. or
hawmede.— 11. or cisterne.—11a;. or ds-
or myraclis. — 28c. or
tern£. — 1666.
X. 11 ^. that is, his lyf.—12c. or hyred
hyne.—12^. or forsaketh.—12^ or scat-
erith.—2Qk. or weocith wood.—41l. or
xi. 8c. or maistir.—27e. or ^lie.—
2Bp. or stilnesse.— 442^. or sweting cloth.
—47w. or myraclis.
xii. 3h. or trewe nard^.— 160. or
hadden mynde.—25c. and 25n. tliat is,
lyf.— 2Qq. or 8eruam,t.—37/*. or myror

vii. 2l. that is, afeeste of tabernaclis.

myracle.

<yu/rsiden.

inge.

viii.

—

clis.—4:0i. or maad hard.—40cc. or al

584

turned.

xiii. 37p. and 38^. that is, lyf.
xiv. 26v. or rememhre.
XV. 2b. or hraunche.—13m. tlmt is,'
lyf.—25w. or freely.—26^. or cortieth
or Tieuynesse. — 21aa. or
charge.— 25^. or derke saumplis.—32^.
or scaterid.—33^. or ouerleying.

xvi. Qj.

forth.

WYCLIFFE AND TYNDALE. St. John xii. 40.-xxi. 25.
xvii. 2,j. or man. — 12ee. or damp-
xviii. \u. or a gardyn. — QQll. or
of this place.
xix. 12a. or fro thennus.—l^z. in
Englisch, place of Caluarie.— 14/! or
euyn.—14^. or mydday.— 36o. or irwke

nacioun.

lesse.

XX. 1^. that is, oftJie woke.
xxi. 25g. or myraclis.

TYNDALE'S TRANSLATION.

Our text of Tyndale's version is taken
verbatim from the very exact and beauti-
ful facsimile published with the follow-
ing Title,—"The first New Testament
printed in the English language [1525
or 1526], translated from the Greek by
William Tyndale : reproduced in Fac-
simile, with an introduction by Francis
Fry, F.S.A., Bristol, printed for the
editor, 1862."

This facsimile is a perfect representa-
tion of the earliest and most complete
copy of Tyndale's version known to
It was printed by Peter Schoffer
exist.
at the free city (frei statt, p. 24) of
Worms, and sold in Oxford " before the
Had it been
7th February, 1526."
dated, it might have been 15^5 or 1526.
Further notice of Tyndale and of this
At
edition is given in the Preface.
present, it is only necessary to observe,
that it is believed our text is in the
exact words written by Tyndale, for it
was printed from his own MS. under
his own eye.
Only the evident and
glaring errors in orthography are cor-
rected, and made to agree with the
same words used in other parts of the
Every possible care has
translation.
been employed to give the words pre-
'* The
cisely as the Martyr wrote them.

errours comitted in the prentynge" (Fol.
ccclv.) are such as would most likely
occur to a German compositor : as ki
The
John vii. 14 gebe for geve gave.
misprints are very numerous ; but they
are at once detected by an English eye.
The following are a few examples :
John iii. 36 beloveth^br beleveth

iv.

2 thought
4 wath

V.
- 7 stoppeth

- 27 soune
- 35 brurnynge
vi. 12 ynought

- 45 hat
- 69 soone

vii. 14 thaught
viii. 20 honhes

- 47 Gog
- 55 is

though
what
steppeth as
stepped in
verse 4
Sonne son
burnynge
ynough enough

verse 15

hath
Sonne son
taught
hondes
God
'lis

It would be a waste of time to cite
more examples. The manifest misprints
have been silently corrected, that our
text might be made, as far as possible,
a perfect representation of the words
written by William Tyndale, one of \he
best scholars and one of the greatest
Divines of his age.

THE END.

—

9i

HISTORY,
BIOGRAPHY,
TOPOGRAPHY,
HERALDRY,
OLD POETRY,

Catalojtjiie of Boofes on
FOLK-LORE,
ARCHEOLOGY,

THE DRAMA,
PHILOLOGY,
BIBLIOGRAPHY,
FINE ARTS,
DIVINITY,

AND

MISCELLANEOUS
LITERATURE.

THE PROPERTY OF JOHN RUSSELL SMITH,

On Sale, by Retail^ at the ankexed Prices, by

ALFRED RUSSELL SMITH,

36, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, (W.)

HAND-BOOK to the POPULAB,
Poetical, and Dramatic Literature
of England, from Caxton the first
English Printer, to the year 1660.
By W. Carew Hazlitt, one thick vol,
8vo, pp. 716, in double columns, half
morocco, Roxhurghe style.

£1. lis 6d

Large Paper, royal

MOROCCO, ROXBURGHE STYLE.

8vo,

half

£3. Ss

It will be found indispensable to Book-Collectors and
It is far in advance of anything hitherto
Booksellers.
published on Old English Literature.— Forming a
supplement to Lowndes, giving the prices the rare
articles have sold for at sales since his time, also of
thousands not mentioned by him.

MARTYR TO BIBLIOGRAPHY:
A Notice of
the Life and Works of
Joheph-Marie Querard, the
French
By Olphar
Hamst.
BiljUographer.
8vo (only 200 printed). 3s

HANDBOOK for FICTITIOUS NAMES,
being a Guide to Authors, chiefly of the
Lighter Literature of the XlXth Century,
who have written under assumed names;
and to
Impostors,
Plagiarists, And Imitators. By Olphar
Hamht, Esq., Author of a Notice of the
Life and Works of J. M. Querard.
8vo,
cloth.

Literary

Forgers,

7s 6d

Thick Paper (only 25 copies printed).

153

An exceedingly curious and interesting book on the bye

ways of Literature.

!L BIBLIOGRAPHY of the Writings of
By Olphar Uamst.

Lord Jiroiigham.
Fcap. 8vo.

is 6d

0)LARD (Goorge).— The Sutton-Dudleys
of Eiighiiid, and tint Diidiciys of Massachu-
Fctts, in New Knglaud.
Hvo, p^dr'jrces,
&€.,

cloth.

158

An interesting volume to thcEnglish genealogist, it ton-
lain'- a gOfj(l dc.il of new m.tttcr relating to this old
JOiigliih Family and their collateral br.-inchc<>.

2ESCHYLTJS.—The Orestea of -ffischylus,
translated into English Verse. By C. N.
Coll., Camb.
Dalton, B.A., of Trin.
Fcp. 8vo, cloth, 2s 6d (original price Ss)

AGINCOURT.—A Contribution towards
an Authentic List of the Commanders of
the English Host in King Henry the
Fifth's Expedition. By the Rev. Joseph
Hunter, post 8vo.

2s 6d

AKEEMAN'S (John Yonge, Fellow and
late Secretary of the Society of Antiquaries)
Archaeological Index
of
Antiquity of the Celtic, Romano-British,
and Anglo-Saxon Periods.
8vo, illustra-
ted with mimerous engravings, comprisvig
upwards offive hundred objects, cloth.
15s

Remains

to

This work, though intended as an introdMction and a
guide to the study of our early antiquities, will, it is
hoped, also prove of service as a book of reference to
the practised Archajologist.

AKERMAN'S (J. Y.) Coins of the Ro-
mans relating to Britain.
Described and
Second edition, greatly en-
Illustrated.
larged, 8vo, with plates and woodcuts, cloth,
10s 6d

"Mr. Akerman's volume contains a notice of every
known variety, with copious illustrations, and is pub-
it should be con-
lished at a very moderate price ;
sulted, not merely for these particular coins, but also
for facts most valuable to all who are interested in
Romano-British History."

Arcfueol.

JoHtiial.

AKERMAN'S (J. Y.) Tradesman's Tokens
FtiiK^k ill London and its Vicinity, from
1618 to 1671, (Uiscribed from the originals
in the Britisli Museum, &c.
Hvo, with 8
phdcs of numerous examples, cloth. 7s Gd
(original price 158,)— large paper in 4to,
cloth.

1 5s

This wf)rk comprises a list of nearly 3000 Tokens, and
t()pogra|)hi( :.d, and
coni:iins occ.isioiial
illustrative,
streets, old
aMli(|iiarian nolcs on persons,
places,
tavern and coffce-huusc signs, ike, &c., with an intro-
causes which led to the
ductory accoiuit of the
adoption of buch a currency.

—

—

Books on Sale at Smith*s, 36, Soho Square, London.

AKERMAN'S (J. Y.) Ancient Coins of
Cities and Princes, Geographically Ar-
ranged and Described—Hispania, Gallia,
8vo, with engravings of many
Cloth

Britannia.
hundred Coins from actiuil exanvples.
7s Cd (original price 18s)

AKERMAN'S (J. Y.) Introduction to the
Study of Ancient and Modern Coins.
Foolscap 8vo, with numerous engravings
from the original Coins {an excellent intro-
ductory hook), cloth.

6s 6d

Contents :

Sect. i.—Origin

of Coinage— Greek
Regal Coins— 2.
Greek Civic Coins— 3.
Greek
Origin of Roman Coinage —
Imi)crial Coins— 4.
Roman Imperial Coins— 6.
Coins— 5.
Consular
Roman British Coins— 7.
Ancient British Coinage
— 8.
English Coinage
Concjuest— 10.
Coinage— 11.
from
Anglo-Gallic Coins— 13.
Coinage of Ireland— 12.
Continental Money in the Middle Ages— 14. Various
Representatives
Ancient and Modern Times— 16.
English Coins realized at Public Sales.

Anglo-Saxon Coinage— 9.
the

in
Table of Prices of

of Coinage— 15.

Forgeries

Scotch

AKERMAN'S (J. Y.) Spring Tide; or, the
12mo, plates,

Angler and his Friends.
cloth.

2s 6d (oBiginal price 6s)

These Dialogues incidentally illustrate the Dialect of

the West of England.

" Never in our recollection has the contemplative
man's recreation been rendered more attractive, nor
the delights of a country life set forth with a truer or
more discriminating zest than in these pleasant
pages."— G^«^.'j Mag-.

AKERMAN'S (J.

Y.) Wiltshire Tales,
illustrative of the Manner.^, Customs, and
that and adjoining Counties.
Dialect of
12mo, cloth.

2s 6d

ALFRED (KING)-Meinorials of King
AUred, being Essays on tlic History and
Anti([uities of England during the Ninth
Century—the Age of King Alfred. By
Edited and in part
various
written by the Rev. Dr. Giles.
Royal
8vo, pp. ^00, coloured plate of K. Alfred's
Jewel, seven plates of Anglo-Saxon Coins,
and views of GrimhaUVs Crypt, cloth, 7s Cd

Authors.

ALLIES (JABEZ, F.S.A.) The Ancient
Brilisli, llonum, and Saxon Antiquities
and Folk-Lore of Worcestershire.
8vo,
500, with 6 plates and 40 woodcuts,
pp.
Ts 6d (original
Second Edition, cloth.
price 14s)

" The good people of Worcestershire are indebted to
for a very handsome volume
Mr. Jabez Allies
county.
illustrative of the history of their native
His book, which treats On tiu Ancient British,
Rontan, and Sa.xon Antiquities and Folk-lore oj
li^on esters/lire, has now reached a second eilition ;
and as Mr. Allies has embodied in this, not only tlie
additions made by him to the original work, but also
several separate publications on points of folk-lore
Rdd legendary interest, few counties can boast of a
more industriously or carefully compiled history of
what may be called its popul.ir :uitii|uitics. The work
Notes and Que/ ies.
is very liandsoniely illustrated."

AMADIS of GAUL. — The Renowned
Romance of Aniadis of Gaul, by Vasco
translated from the Spanish
LoBEiiiA,
version of Gahciokdonez de Montalvo
by RoBT. SouTHEY. A new edition in 3
vols, fcap. 8vo, cloth.

—^ Larfje Paper.

3 vols,

post

8vo,

153.

£1. 2s 6d

Amadis of Gaul is among prose, what Orlando Furioso
is among metrical romances; not the oldest of its kind,
but the best.

AMYE ROBSART and the EARL of
Leicester: a Critical Inquiry into the
Authenticity of the various Stateme'nts in
relation to the Death of Amye Robsart,
and of the Libels on the Earl of Leicester,
with a Vindication of the Earl by his
Nephew Sir Philip Sydney: with a History
of Kenilworth Castle, including an Ac-
count of the splendid entertainment given
to Queen Elizabeth, by the Earl of
Leicester, in 1575, from the Works of
Robert Laneham and George Gascoigne:
together
Corres-
pondence of Sir Robert Dudley, Son of the
Earl of Leicester. By George Adlard,
author
of
England." A handsome vol, 8vo, pp.
368, with fine plates, cloth.

" The Sutton-Dudley s

with Memiors

and

12s

of

ANCIENT ROLLS of ARMS, No 1.
Glover's Roll of the Reign uf Henry III,
Edited by George J.^Armytage, F.S.A.
4to, ivith frontispiece of Shields, seu'cd.
4s
No. 2.—Roll of the Reigns of Henry IIL
and Edward I.
l^y N. Charles, Lan-
Edited by George J.
caster Herald.
Armytage, F.S.A.
Small 4to, fruntis-
ylece of Arms.
10s
ANDERSON (WM.)

and
Surnames, with some Heraldic and Lio-
8vo, woodcuts of Arms
graphical Notices.
and Seals, cloth.
3s 6d (original jDrico
6s)

Genealogy

ANECDOTA LITERARIA, a Collcc-
tiun of Sliort Poems in English, Latin, and
French, illustrative of the Literature and
History of England in the Xlllth Cen-
tury, and more especially of the Condi-
tion and Manners of the Different Classes
of Society, Edited by Thomas Wright,
M.A.
Svo, cloth, only 250 copi<:s printed.
5s

ANGLING.—BLAKEY (ROBERT) His-
torical Sketches of the Angling Literature
of ail Nations, to which is added a Lili-
liogra])hy of Englisli Writers on Anglinv'-,
by J, R. Smith.

Fcap. Svo, cloth.

53

'

—

,

Looks on Sale at Smith's, 36, Soho Sfjitare, London.

ANGLING. -SMITH (J. R.) A Biblio-
grapliical Catalogue of English Writers
on Angling and Ichthyology, (reprinted
from the foregoing).

Post 8vo.

Is 6d

ANGLO-SAXON. —A Compendious
Anglo-Saxon and English Dictionary, by
the Eev. J. Bosworth, D.D., F.R.S., &c.,
Anglo-Saxon Professor in the University of
^printed in treble
Oxford,
columns.

8vo,
12s

closely

This is not a mere abridgment of the large dictionary,
but almost entirely a new work. In this compendious
one will be found, at a very moderate price, all that
is most practical and valuable in the former expensive
edition of 1838, with a great accession of new words
and matter."—Author's Preface.

ANGLO-SAXON.—VERNON'S (E.

" Mr,

J.,
B.A., Oxon) Guide to the Anglo-Saxon
Tongue, on the Basis of Professor Rask's
Grammar; to which are added Reading
Lessons in Verse and Prose, with Notes,
for the Use of Learners.
12mo, cloth. 5s
Vernon has, we think, acted wisely in taking
Rask for his model : but let no one suppose from the
title that the book is merely a compilation from the
The accidence is abridged
work of that philologist.
from Rask, with constant revision, correction, and
modification ; but the syntax, a most important
portion of the book, is original, and is compiled with
great care and skill ; and the latter half of the volume
consists of a well-chosen selection of extracts from
Anglo-Saxon writers, in prose and in verse, for the
practice of the student, who will find great assistance
in reading them from the grammatical notes with
which they are accompanied, and from the glossary
which follows them.
This volume, well studied, will
enable anyone to read with ease the generality of
Anglo-Saxon writers.

Literary Gazette.

in

a Selection

A N G L OS AXON. — Analecta Anglo-
and
Saxonica :
Verse, from Anglo-Saxon Authors of va-
Designed
rious Ages ; with a Glossary.
chiefly as a first Look for students. By
Benjamin Tuorpe, F.S.A. A new Edi-
tion with corrections and improvements.
Post 8vo, cloth.

Prose

7s 6d

ANGLO-SAXON—A Delectus ; Serving
as a First Class-Book to the Language,
by the Rev. W. Barnes, B.D.,
of St.
12mo, cloth.
John's College, Cambridge.
2s Cd

" 'J,

;

'

I

'

'

,

,

:.•.

i',-

li..,, Il

liiL-
I, and il:

• \i/ho wish to possess a critical knowledge of
Mative English, some acciuninlancc with
' n is indispensable ; and we have never
' lion better calculated than the prc-
!i<; wants of .T bcfjinncr in a short space
'igations are well
,c to (Jrcck, tlie
,,...,.,.,. A phik)S(j|jhical
ihe Delectus consists of
jtart.
n subjects, with extracts from
Saxon Chronicle.
; -ic ii a Kood GI'j->sary at the cud."—AxiiiiN^UM.
ANGLO-SAXON Introduction to
compri.^ing NA~
liP s II'. Hilly (Ml tlie Bii'tliday of St. Gre-
gory, with a Copious (jlo.ssary, &c., by L.

II..t..:y and the

licudiiig,

, .^u.vjii

'\

.

I.

i

;.

1 "

'•'

! S

i2ino, cloth.

28 Uil

iurk.iblc for IxMUty of < oiiH"-,;!-
futlli Augu:.uuc'3

a.H scllin.;

..

,.;,

tuiMiuu lu lUe " Load oftlic Aii^k*.

ANGLO-SAXON VERSION of the Life
Guthlac, Hermit of Croyland.
of St.
Printed, for the first time, from a MS. in
the Cottonian Library, with a Translation
and Notes by Charles Wycliffe Good-
win, M.A., Fellow of Catherine Hall,
Cambridge.

12mo, cloth.

5s

ANGLO-SAXON VEBSION of th3
Hexameron of St. Basil, and the Anglo-
Saxon llemains of St. Basil's Admonitio
ad Filiuni Spiritualem. Now first printed
from MSS. in the Bodleian Library, with
a Translation and Notes by the Bev.
H. W. Norman. 8vo, second edition, en-
larged, seived.

43

A N G L O - S A X O N — Narratiunculse
Anglice Conscripta. De pergamenis ex-
scribebat notis iliustrabat eruditis copiam,
faciebat T. Oswald Cockayne, M.A.
8vo.

5s

Containing Alexander the Great's Letter to Aristotle
on the situation of India— Of wonderful things in the
East—The Passion of St. Margaret the Virgin—Of
the Generation of Man, &c.

ANGLO-SAXON.—A FRAGMENT of
^Ifric's Anglo-Saxon Grammar, iElfric's
Glossary, and a Poem on the Soul and
Body, of the Xllth Century, discovered
among the Archives of Worcester Cathe-
dral, by Sir Thomas Phillipps, Bart.
Is Cd
Folio, privately printed, sewed.

ANGLO-SAXON and GOTHIC. — Four

Versions of the Holy Gospels, viz.,
in
Gothic, A.D. 3G0 ; Anglo-Saxon. 995 ;
Wyclilfe, 1389 ; and Tyndale, l'52f), in
parallel columns, with Preface and Notes
by tlie Rev. Dr. Bosworth, Professor of
Anglo-Saxon in the University of Oxford,
assisted by George AVaring, M.A., of
Caml)ridge and Oxford. One vol, 8vo,
above 600 pages, cloth. 12s 6d

a very low price has been fixed to ensure Jln extended

sale among students and higher schools.

" The texts are printed in four parallel columns, ami
their

very great care appears to have been taken in
collation and correction. "

AthenaRUM.

" We heartily welcome this volume, brought out with
so much care and ability ... It does credit to
• The work
the printers of tile University.
is sclujlarlike, and is a valuable contribution to tiio
. We heartily
materials for Eiblical Criticism.
commend it to the study of all who are interested
cither in the philology of the Knglish langii.a^e, or in
the history and formation of our Authorized Ver-
sion."—Tiiic
Qua rtcrly Review.

RBMliMbRANCiiK,

CltKISTlAN

(i

•

.

.

.

"It may almost b« a (luestion, whether the

present
volume possesses greater interest for the diviiu: ( r
for the |iliilolo;iist. To the lallcr i' nuist t eilaiuly he
inleicsluix frum the opportunity wliich it alTords liini
ofm.tiliinj; the^r.tdual development of our lau'iua^e.
The four vi-rsioiis of the (Jospel,
wiih a
d and instructive preface, .ind a few necess.nv
firm a vohjme, the value and impoM.mee of
I ii':i;d :.i..itn.lv be insisted upon."— NoTiis ANU

.

.

.

\

< »UI!,l<lll!>.

—

.

1
1

BooJcs on Sale at SmitJts, 36, Soho Square, London.

AKCHJEOLOGIA CAMBRENSIS. —A
Record of the Antiquities, Historical,
Genealogical, Topographical, and Archi-
tectural, of" Wales and its Marches.
First
Series, complete, 4 vols, 8vo, many 'plates
and woodcuts, cloth.

£2. 23

Odd Parts may be had to complete Sets.

ARCHiEOLOGICAL

INSTITUTE. —
Report of the Transactions of the Annual
Meeting of the Archaeological Institute
held at
Chichester, July, 1853.
8vo,
ifnany plates and woodcuts, cloth.
7s 6d
Printed uniformly with the other Annual Congresses of

the Institute.

AB.CHER FAMILIES. — Memorials of
Families of the Surname of Archer in
various Counties of England, and in Scot-
land, Ireland, Barbadoes, America, &c.
By Capt J. H. Lawbence Archer. 4to,
hut few copies printed, doth,

12s 6d

ARCHERY.—Toxophilus; the School
of Shooting (the first Engli.sh Treatise
on Archery.) By Roger Ascham, reprinted
from the Rev. Dr. Giles's Edition
of
Ascham's Whole Works. Fcap. 8vo, cloth.
38

ARTHUR (KING). La Mort d'Arthur-
The History of King Arthur and the
Knights of the Roimd Table.
Com-
piled by Sir Thomas Malory, Knight.
Edited fron the Edition of 1634, with'ln-
Thomas
and
troduction
Wright, M.A.,
Fcp.
revised edition.
8vo,
cloth.

second and
15s.

by
3 vols.

Notes,
F.S.A.

Large taper, 3 vols, post 8vo, cloth.

£1. 2s 6d

The only uncastrated edition. Several others have ap-
peared since this was published, but they all have
Dccn abridged or adapted to the capacity of young
ladies and gentlemen.
is the storehouse of the
legends which Tennyson, Morris, Westwood, Lytton,
and others have turned into Poetry.

It

ASCHAM (ROGER)—The Whole Works
OF Roger Ascham, now first collected
and revised, with Life of the Author.
By the Rev. Dr. Giles, formerly Fellow of
C. CO., Oxford.
4 vols. fcp. 8vo, cloth.
£1.

"

Large paper, 4 vols, post 8vo, cloth.

£\. 10s

Ascham is a great name in our national literature.

lie
was one of the first founders of a true EuRlisli style in
prose composition, and of the most respectable and
useful of our scholars.

Retrospective Review.

AUBREY'S (JOHN, the Wiltshire Antiquary)
MISCELLANIES.
Fourth Edition.
With some Additions and an Index. Fcp.
8vo, portrait and cuts, cloth.
Contents :—Day Fatality, Fatalities of Families and
Apparitions,
Blows,

Portents, Omens,
Impulses,

Places,
Voices,

Dreams,

4s

Knockings,

Invisible

Prophecies, Miracles, Magic, Transportation by an
Invisible Power, Visions in a Cr>'stal, Converse with
Angels, Corpse Candles, Oracles, Ecstasy, Second
Sight, &c. ; with an Appendix, containing his Intro-
duction to the Survey of North Wiltshire.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY of JOSEPH LISTER
(a Nonconformist), of Bradford, Yorkshire,
with a contemporary account of the De-
fence of Bradford and Capture of Leeds,
Edited by
by Parliamentarians, in 1642.
Thos. Wright, F.S.A.

8vo, cloth.

2s

AUTOBIOGRAPHY of Thomas Wright,
of Birkenshaw, in the County of York,
Edited by his Grandson,
1736-1797.
Thomas Wright, M.A., F.S.A. Fcp. 8vo,
pp. 376, cloth.

53

Particularly interesting about Bradford, Leeds, Halifax,
and their neighbourhoods, and a curious picture of
manners and persons in the middle of the last
century.

AUTOGRAPHICAL MISCELLANY; A
Collection of Autograph Letters, Interest-
ing Documents, &c., executed in facsimile
by FiiEDK. Netherclift, each facsimile
accompanied with a page of letter-press
by Iv. Sims, of the British Museum. Roy.
4to, A handsome vol, extra cloth. £1. Is
(or ifjinal price £ 1 . 16s)

Containing sixty examples of hitherto unpublished
Letters and Documents of Blake, Boileau, Buona-
parte, Burns, Calvin, Camden, Carrier, Catherine de
Medicis, Charles I., Chatterton, Congreve, Crammer,
Cromwell, Danton, D'Aubigne, Dryden, Edward VL,
Elizabeth, Elizabeth (sister of Louis XVI.), Franklin,
Galilei, Glover, Goethe, Goldsmith, Henry VII I.,
Hyde (Anne), James II., Jonson, Kepler, Kotzebue,
Latimer, Loyola, Louis XI V., Louis XVI., Luther,
Maintenon, Maria Antoinette, Marlborough, Mar-
montel, Mary Queen of Scots, Melancthon, Newton,
Tenn, Pompadour, Pole (Cardinal), Raleigh, Ridley,
Rousseau, Rubens, Sand, Schiller,
Robespierre,
Spenser, Sterne, Tasso, Voltaire, Walpole (Horace),
Washington, Wolfe, Wolsey, Wren, and Young.

For the interesting nature of the documents, this collec-
tion far excels all the previous ones. With two ex-
ceptions (formerly badly executed), they have never:
been published before.

j

AUTOGRAPHS.—A Hand-book to I
Autographs, being a Rea#y Guide to the
Handwriting of Distinguished Men and
Women of every Nation, designed fur the
Use of Literary Men, Autograph Colhc-
tors, and others. Executed by Frederk K
Geo. Netherclift.
Q>\o,ahovelQ{} spcci-\
K'ls 6d
mens, cloth.

— Printed ujyoii one side only. 8vo, cloth. 1

The specimens contain two or three lines each besii

the signature, so that to the historian such a wo;
will recommend itself as enabling him to test th<
genuineness of the document he consults, whilst th(
judgment of the autograph collector may be similarlj
assisted, and his pecuniary resources economized bj
a judicious use of the " Manual." To the book
worm, whose name is "legion," it may be observec
that daily experience teaches us the great value am
interest attached to books containing " margina
notes" and "memoranda," when traced to be iron
the pens of emment persons.

Boolcs on Sale at Smith's, 36, Soho Sqtiare, London.

—

—

—
—

AtlTOGRAPH SOUVENIR; a

Col-
lection of Autograph Letters, Interesting
Documents, &c., Selected fromtlie British
Museum, and from other sources. Public
and Private, executed in facsimile by Fre-
derick Geo. Netherclift, with Letter-
press Transcriptions and occasional Trans-
lations, &c., by Richard Sims, of the Bri-
tish Museum.
cloth, a handsome
volume, gilt leaves.

£2. 23

4to,

The examples are different from any other collection.

ANKS' (Sir T. C.) Baronia Anglia,
Concentrata, or a Concentration
of all the Baronies called Baro-
nies in Fee, deriving their Origin
from Writ of Summons, and not from
any Specific Limited Creation, show-
ing the Descent and Line of Heirsliip,
as\vell of those Families mentioned by
Sir William Dugdale, as of those whom
that celebrated Author has omitted to
interspersed with Interesting
notice :
Remarks.
and
Notices
Whereto is added, the proofs of Parlia-
mentary Sitting, from the Reign of Ed-
ward I. to Queen Anne ; also, a Glossary
of Dormant English, Scotch, and Irish
Peerage Titles, with reference to p-csumed
153
existing Heirs.
(original price £3. 3s;

2 vols, 4to, cloth.

Explanatory

—— Large Paper Copy {very few printed).

2 vols.

£1. Is

A book of great research, by the well-known author of
the "Dormant and Extinct Peerage," and other
Those fond of genea-
heraldic and historical w«rks.
logical pursuits ought to secure a copy while it so
It may be considered a isupplement to his
cheap.
Vol. ii., pp. 210-300, contains an His-
former works.
torical Account of the first Settlement in Nova Scotia,
a«d the foundation of Nova Scotia Baronets, distin-
guishing those who had seizin of lands there.

BARBER (G. D., commonly called Barler-
Beaumont) Suggestions on the Ancient
Thick 8vo, cloth.
Britons, in 3 parts.
7s 6d {original price 14s)

Reminiscences

BARKER.—Literary Anecdotes and
Contemporary
Pro-
fessor Porson and others, from the Manu-
script Papers of the late E. II. Barker,
Esq., of Thetlbrd, Norfolk, with an Ori-
ginal Memoir of th« Author.
2 vols, 8vo,
cloth.

of

12s

A singular book, full of strange stories and jests. Only

I20 copies were printed.

BARNES' (Rev. William, of Came Rectory^
Dorchester) A Philolngical
(Irammar,
grounded upon Eiigli.->h, and formed from
a comparison of more tlian Sixty Langua-
Being an Introduction to tlie Science
ges.
of OraminarH of all LangungCH, especially
En'di.sh, Latin, and GrcoK. bvo, (pp. 322),
clotk.

li«

BARNES' (Rev. W.) Tiw; or a View
of the Roots and Stems of the English as
a Teutonic Tongue. Fcap. 8vo, cloth.
5a
"I hold that my primary roots are the roots Of all the
Teutonic languages ; and, if my view is the true one,
it must ultimately be taken up by the German and
other Teutonic grammarians, and applied to their
languages."

Tfie Aut/ior.

BARNES' (Rev. W.) Early England
and the Saxon English ; with some Notes
on the Father Stock of the Saxon English,
the Frisians.

Fcap. 8vo, cloth.

3s

BARNES' (Rev. W.) Notes
cient Briton and the Britons.
cloth.

3s

on An-
Fcap. 8vo,

" Mr. Barnes has given us the result of his collection
for a course of Lectures on the subiect, and has pro-
duced a scries of Sketches of the Ancient Britons,
their language, laws, modes of life, and of their
social state as compared with that of the Sa.xons,

. which will be read with considerable interest."

Notes and Queries.

BARNES' (Rev. W.) Views of Labour

and Gold.

Fcp. 8vo, cloth.

33

"The title, 'Views of Labour and Gold,' cannot be
said to indicate the scope of ,the Essays, which open
with pictures of primitive life, and pass on, through
an agreeably diversified range of topics, to considera-
tions of the rights, duties, and interests of Capital and
Labour, and to the enquiry, What constitutes the
utility, wealth, and positive well-being of a nation?
Subjects of this class are rarely handled with so firm
a grasp and such light and artistic manipulation."—
A thenaeitrn.

BERKSHIRE.—History and Antiquities
of the Hundred of Bray, in Berkshire.
By the Rev. Chas Kelly.
8vo, cloth.
7s Cd

I

The same, with 10 folding pedigrees,

cloth.

10s ed

BERKSHIRE.— WINDSOR.— ANNALS
of Windsor, being a History of the Castle
and Town, with some Accomit of Eton
and Places Adjacent. By R. R. Tighe
and J. E. Davis, Esqs.
In 2 thick vols,
royal 8vo, illustrated with many engra-
vings, coloured and plain,
cloth,
£l. 5s {original price £4. 4s)

extra

*• Wc have read, not indeed every word, but not much
less than the wiiolc of this book, wiili a s.uisfaciioii
which wc think every one will share who has given
any serious study or attention to ]''.n{;lish history,
and with a strong impression of the good taste, indus-
We liave
try, and literary skill of the authors
chosen only one or two illustrations of the contents
of the 'Annals of Windsor,' in order to show their
historical value ; but they furnish a vast (lu.uitity of
information, poss<;ssing much general and literary
interest, at which our space will not allow us even to
glance."

The Saturdajf Review.

" Win<lsor is a grand subject ! The historian, the poet,
the artist,^ the statesman, the sohlicr, the courtier,
tho i)laycr,— from mantled king to paping citizen,
there does not exist a man who is not interested in
this old pile, its vicinity, and its traditions
'I'hcse volumes may be consulted with good result by
any one anxious to discover any ( ircunistancc, impor-
tant or trivial, concerning Windsor, which tuu ever
bcou rctyrUccl."— y/i* Athtnaeutn.

6

Boolcs on Sale at Smithes, Z6, Soho Srjiiare, London,

—

BEDFORD'S (Rev. W. K. Riland) The
Blazon of Episcopacy, being a complete
List of the Archbishops and Bishops of
England and Wales, and their Family
Arms, drawn and described, from the first
introduction of Heraldry to the present
8vo, 144 pages, and 62 ^ja^es of
time.
drawings of Arms, cloth.

15s

This work depicts the arms of a great number of

English Families not to be found in other works.

" There has been an amount of industry bestowed upon
this curious work wliich is very creditable to
the
author, and will be found beneficial to all who care
for the sul)ject on which it has been employed."
ATHENit:UM.

BERRY'S (W.) Podiqrees and Arms
of the Nobility and Ucntry of Iloiiiord-
125 printed), Ids.
shire.
£1. 10s [original price £3. 10s)

Folio (only

BIBLIOTHEaUE

ASIATIQUE

et
Alriciino, ou Catalogue des Ouvrngcs
rchitifri a I'Asic et a TAIVic^ue qui ont paru
jusqu'en 1700, par II. TEiiNAUX-CoMrANS.
8vo,
sewed.
10s 6d

supplement

et index^

avec

*'BIBLIA PAUPERUM."

One of the
earliest and n^o.st curious Block Books,
reproduced in facsimile from a copy in
the British Museum, by J. V\\. Berjeau.
Koyal 4to, half hounds.

£2. 2s.

As a specimen of the earliest woodcuts and of printed
block-books, destined to supersede the manuscripts
anterior to the valuable invention of GuttenVicrj^, tlie
Bi.'ii.iA Paui'Ekum is well worthy the attention of the
amateur of Fine Arts as well as of the Iiiblio<;rni)lier.
It consists of 40 engravings, ]3rinted on one side only
of the leaves, and disposed £o as to have the figures
opposite to each other.

The engravings were printed by friction, with a sub-
stanrc of ,a brownish colour instead of printing ink,
which was unknown at this early period. To imitate
as nearly as possible the original, the plates in this
facsimile are disposed opposite each other, and printed
in a brownish colour.
Various editions of this lilock-
Book have been discovered, without any writer jjcing
able to say which is the first one. A review of them
is given in the printed Introduction of the book.

Besides the rhymed Latin Poetry— of which part was
given by Heinecken, and after him by Ottiey— the
Introduction gives, for the first time, the whole of the
Text printed on both sides in the upper compartment,
as well as an English E.\planalion of the subject.

Only 250 copies havk hicrn printed, uniformi.v
WITH Mr. S. Leigh Sotheby's /'r/V/c/^m Tyf>o^ra-
fliicn.

BROOKE (RICHARD, F.S.A.) Visits to
Field-s of Battle in En.^land, of the XVth
Century, with some Miscellaneous Tracts
and Paper.s, principally upon A rrliccohx^i-
Royal 8vo, plates, cloth.
cal Subjects.
15s

Cross,

Towton,

Mortimer's

The work contains a descriptive account of the scenes
of most of the memorable conflicts in the Wars of
York and Lancaster, comprising the celebrated bat-
tles of Shrewsbury, Blore Heath, Northampton,
Wakefield,
Barnct,
'J'ewkesbury, Bosworih, and Stoke, and genealogical
and other particulars of the powerful, warlike, and
distinguished personages who were the principal
actors in those stirring and eventful times, with plans
of some of the fields of I'attle, and .an Appendix con-
taining the principal Acts of Attainder relative to the
Wars of the Roses, and Lists of the Noblemen,
Knights, and other personages attainted by them.
BUCSHURST (LORD) The Dramatic
and Poetical Work.s ofThomas Sackville
Lord Buckhurst, aud Earl of Dorset.
With Introduction and Life by the present
Lord BucKnuRST. Fcap. 8vo, cloth, fine
2')0vtrait from a picture at Buckhurst, now
first engraved.

4s.

BURKE'S (JOHN) GENEALOGICAL
and Heraldic History of the Extinct and
Dormant Baronetcies of England, Ireland,
Medium 8vo, second
and Scotland.
EDITION, 638 closchj printed pages, in dou-
ble columns, with about 1000 ^?-//?.9 engraved
on ivood, fine port, of Jame.s L, cloth.
lOs
{original price £1. 8s)

This work engaged the attention of the author for
several j^cars, comprises nearly a thousand fami-
lies, many of them amongst the most ancient and
eminent in the kingdom, each carried down to its
representatives
antl
minute detail-; of the .alliances, achievements, and for-
tunes, generation after generation, from the earliest
to the latest period.

still existing, with elaliorate

BURN'S (J.

in

S.) History of Parish
England, and
Ivegisters
Register.^
of {Scotland, Ireland, the Colonics, Epi.s-
copal Chapels in and about London,
the Geneva Register of the Protestant
Refugee.'?, with Biographical Notes, etc.
Second edition, greatly enlarged, 8vo, cloth.
lOs 6d

BURN'S (J. S.) The Hi^h Commission,
Notices of tlie Cmirt ami its Proceedings.
8vo, cloth, only 100 printed.

3s.

BLOOMFI ELD.— Selection from the
of Kobtrt Bloomlhld,
the Sulfolk Poet. Edited by W II. Haut,

('ontsjK.iuU'Uco

Is Cd

F.S.A.

8vo, pp. 28, sewed.

BROOKE (R.) A Descriptive Account
of Liverpool,
the
last Quarter of the XVII 1th Century,
1775—1800. A Imndsome vol, royal 8vo,
128 6d {original
with illustrations, cloth.
^ice £1. 58)

it was

during

as

BURN'S (J.

S.) The Star Chnmbcr.—
Notices of the Court and its Proceedings,
with a few Additional Notes on the High
Commission.

8vo, cloth.

53

ALTON'S (R. BELL) Annals and
Legends of Calais, with .Sketches
of Emigrd Notabilities!, and ]\Ie-
moirs of Lady Hamilton.
Post
8vo, with frontispiece and vignette, cloth.
5s

A very interesting book on England's first Colony, the

only Englitih book written on this singular place.

—

Boohs 0)1 Sale at Smithes, 86, Soho Square, London.

CAMDEN'S (WILLIAM) REMAINS
Fqi. 8vo, Jinc 'por-

Conceming Britain.
trait, cloth.

Gs

LARGE PAPER, Post 8V0, cloth.

7s 6ll

The eighth edition of tliis interesting vohime by Cam-
den, the famous Antiquary, consistiii.^ of little essays
?.nd scraps, which did not come within the scope of
his " Britannia."

CARDWELL (REV. DR., Professor of An-
cient History^ Oxford) Lectures on tlie
Coinage of the Greeks and Romans, de-
livered in the University of Oxford.
8vo,
cloth.

4s {original price 8s 6d)

** A very interesting historical volume, and written in a

pleasing and popular manner.

CARTWRIGHT.—Memoirs of the Life,
Writings, and Mechanical Inventions of
Edmund Cartwright, D.D., F.KS., In-
ventor of the Power Loom, djc.
Edited
by E. H. Strickland.
Post 8vo, engra-
vings, hoards. 2s 6d {original price 10s 6d)
It contains some interesting literary history, Dr. Cart-
wright numbering among his correspondents. Sir W.
Jones, Crabbe, Sir H. l3avy, Fulton, Sir S. Raffles,
Langhorne, and others. He was no mean Poet, as
his legendary tale of "Armine and Elvira" (given in
tke Appendix) testifies. Sir W. Scott says it contains
stme excellent poetry, expressed with unusual felicity.
CHATTO (W. A., Author of ''JachsorCs His-
tory of Wood Engravings'^) Facts and Spe-
culations on the History of Playing Cards
in Europe. 8vo, profusely illustrated ivith
engravings, both plain and coloured, cloth.
£1. Is

" The inquiry into the origin and signification of the
suits and their marks, and the heraldic, theological,
and political emblems pictured from time to time, in
their changes, opens a new field of antiquarian inte-
rest : and the perseverance with which Mr. Chalto
has explored it, leaves little to be gained by his suc-
cessors. The plates with which the volume is en-
riched add considerably to its value in this point of
view.
It is not to be denied that, lake it altogciiier,
it contains more matter than has ever before been
collected in one view upon the same subject.
In
spite of its faults it is exceedingly amusing ; and the
most critical reader cannot fail to be entertained by
the variety of curious outlying learning Mr. Clialto
has somehow contrived to draw into the investiga-
tion."

"THE GAME OF THE CHESSE," tho
First liook printed in England by Willi-un
Caxton, rejjroduced in lacsimiie from a
copy ill the British Museum, with a few
Remarks on Cax ton's Tyjxigraphical Pro-
ductions by Vincent FiciuiNw.
4to, pj).
184, tci^/j. 23 curious woodcuts, halfmoror CO
or, in antique calf, trilh
uncut.
bevelled hoardji and carmine edges.
£1. 8s
Frequently as wc rc.id of the works of Caxlon and the
I-cttcr
, ever h.'ul the opportunity of
iictions, and fdrinirig a ijropcr
ly and skill of those who ['wA
ThR TVI'K HAS RKf'.N CAKKI'UI.LV IMITATRD, AND TMP.

early English Printers, and of tlieir
Books, very f
seeing .-iiiy of
estim.-tto of tl
pr.ictiscH the "Nobic Art of Printing."

£1. l.s

lila< k

^

•

Woodcuts FAfstMM.RD iiv Miss iJvKin.n.
'llic
Paper and Wntcrniarks have also been made express-
ly. -
' tl,cbo(,k
I nature,
'" '
^li"
- 1^ _i'.:,sof the
fount, and the Dcgcuary study and comparison of

''-•'

_, I

'

-

,

.

'

'

•

•

'

Caxton's Works wiih those of his contempor.nries in
Germany, by Mr. V. Figgins, who spent two years'
"labour of love" in cutting the matrixes for the type.

COLLECTION OF LETTERS, on Sci-
entific Subjects, illustrative of the Pro-
gress of Science in England. Temp. Eli-
Edited by J. O.
zabeth to Charles II.
Halliwell.

8vo, cloth.

3s

Comprising letters of Digges,Dee, Tycho Ilrahe, Lower,
Hariott, Lydyatt, Sir W. Petty, Sir C. Cavendish,
Brancker, Pell, etc. ; also the Autobiography of Sir
Samuel Morland, from a MS. in Lambeth J'alace,
Nat. Tarpoley's Corrector Analyticus, etc.

COMBERBACH FAMILY. — Collection
for a Genealogical Account of the Fa-
mily of Comberbach (of Cheshire, etc.)
By G. W. Marshall. 8vo,plat-cofArms,
dx., cloth.

5s

CORNWALL. — Footprints of Former
Men in Far Cornwall (Sketches of Places,
Men, and Manners). By the llev. B.
S. Hawker, Vicar of Morwenstow, Au-
Crown
thor of "Cornish Ballads,'^ etc.
8vo, cloth.

5s

CORNWALL. — HALLIWELL's (J. O.)
Rambles in Western Cornwall, by the
Footsteps of the Giants ; with Notes on
the Celtic Remains of the Land's End
District and the Isles of Scilly.
Fcp. 4to,
elegantly printed by Whittinghain, cloth.
7s 6d

CORNWALL. — EDMONDS (H., late
of Penzance) The Land's End District,
its Aiiti(][uitics, Natural Ilistorj'-, Natural
Phenomena, and Scenery ; also a Brief
Memoir of Richard Trcvilhick, C. E,
8vo, mapsj plates, and ivoodcuts, cloth.
7s Gd

CORNWALL. -KYNANCE COVE ;

or,
The Cornish Smugglers, A Tale of llic
liy W. B. Fohfar, Author
Last Century,
of '^Pentoivan," "Pengosick Castle," etc.,
Fcp. 8vo, boards.

23

CORNWALL.—PEDLER (E. H., of lAs-
Icmrd) The Anglo-Saxon ICpiscoj^ate of
Cornwall, with some Account of the
Bi.shops of Crediton.
3.s Gd
{original price 7m Gd)

8vo, clolh.

COSIN'S (MR., Sccrclnry in the Comviimoners
of Forfeited Estates) Names of the llomnn
Catholics, Non Jurors, and other.t, who
Refibsed to take the Oatlis to iving (leorg(»
I., together with their Tilles, Addition-,
Places of Abode, the Parishes and 'J\(\vii-
ship.s where their Land.s lay,the Names of
the then Tenants, and the Annual Vabuj.
of them as returned by thcniRclves.
Jlc-
printed from the Edition of 1745.
8vo,
clolh.

5.S

A curious book for the Topograplier and Genealogist.

—

—

Books on Sale at Smith! s^ 3G, Solio Square^ London,

8
CRASHAW. — The Poetical Works of
HiCHARD Crashaw, Autlior of "Stops
to the Temple," " Sacred Poems, with
other Delights of the Muses,'' and " Poe-
Edited by W.
mata," now first collected.
B. TuRNBULL. Fcp. 8vo, cloth.

5s.

"Hes€cmsto have resembled Herbert in the turn of
Ellis.

mind, but possessed more fancy and genius."

EFOE.—The Life and Times of
Daniel De Foe, with lleniarks.
Digressive
V>y
Will. Chadwick.
8vo, pp. 472,
5s. (original price 10s Gd)

and Discursive.

'portrait, cloth.

DERBYSHIBE.—BATEMAN'S (Thos.,
of Youlgrave, Derbyshire) Vestiges of the
Antiquities of Derbyshire, and the Sepul-
chral Usages of its Inhabitants, from the
most Remote Ages to the Reformation.
8vo, with numerous woodcuts of Tumuli and
Crosses, Tombs, cC'c, cloth.
their contents,
153

DERBYSHIRE. -BIGSBY's (ROBERT,
M.A., LL.l).) Historical and Topographi-
cal Description of Repton, in the County
of Derby, with Incidental View of objects
4to, a handsome
of note in its Vicinity.
volume, i<;i7/i seventy illustrations on cop-
per, stone, and wood, cloth.
18s {priyinal
price £3. 3s)

DEVON".—KING'S (R.

J). The Forest
of Dartmoor and its Borders in Devon-
shire, an Historical
Foolscap
8vo, cloth.

Sketch.

3s

DORSE T.-WARNE'S (CHARLES.
FXA.) The Celtic Tumuli of Dorset ; and
Account of Personal and other Researches
ill the Sepulchral Mounds of the Duro-
Folio, ^^/a^cs and looodcuts, cloth.
triges.
£i. lOs

DRUMMOND's (WILLIAM, Of

Haw-
thonidcn) Poetical Works. Now first pub-
Edited by W. B. Turn-
lished entire.
bull.
53

Fcp. 8vo, fine portrait, cloth,

" Tlie sonnets of Drummond," .says Mr. Hall.im, "are
pohshed and elegant, free from conceit and bad taste,
and in pure unblemished English."
DURHAM.-RAINE (REV.

JAMES)
History and Antiquities of Nortli Dur-
ham, as subdivided into the Shires of Nor-
ham, Island, and Bedlington, which from
the Saxon i)eiiod until 1844 constituted
part of the County of Durham, but are
now united to Northumberland. Both
Vakv^ complete, io\\o,jine plates (wanting
3 plates in the first part) bds.
— Part II. {wanting by many Subscrihrrs)
Laruu Pafer.

complete,

£1. 5s

183.

quite
£1. l8

DURHAM.—RAINE (REV. JAMES)
Historical Account of the Episcopal Castle
or Palace of Auckland.
Royal 4to, fine
vieu^s, p^ortraits, and seals, cloth.
10s Cd
(original price £1. Is)

D U R H A M.—Illustrations of the Ar-
Antiquities of the County
chitectural
of Durham, Ecclesiastical, Castellated, and
Domestic. By R. W. Billings.
4to, 61
fine plates, bds. £1. Is {original price £2. 2s)
ARLY POPULAR POETRY.—
Remains of the Early Popular
Poetry op England, collected
and edited by W. Carew Hazlitt.
4 vols, fcp. 8vo, with many curious woodcut
— Large Paper, 4 vols, post 8vo, cloth.
facsimiles, cloth. £1

£1. 10s

ELLIS'S (W. SMITH) Antiquities
of Heraldry, collected from Literature,
Coins, Gems, Vases, and other Monuments
of Pre-Christian and Meditcval Times ;
with a Catalogue of Early Armorial
Seals ; tending to show that Modern
Heraldry embodies or is derived from the
Religious Symbols, the Military Devices,
and the Emblems of the Heathen Deities
of Antiquity. A handsome volume, 8vo,
jDp. 30(>, with 20 plates, cloth.
10s {original
price 15s)

ELLIS FAMILIES. — Notices of the
EUises of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
including the Families of Alis, Fitz-Elys,
Helles, &c. By W. Smith Ellis, of the
8vo, arms and plates,
!Middle Temple.
{very few printed) cloth.

£1. Is

ENGLAND as seen hy Foreigners in
the Days of Elizabeth and James and
the First, comprising Translations of the
Journals of the two Dukes of Wirtemberg
in 1592 and 1010, both illustrative of
Shakespeare. With Extracts from the
Travels of Foreign Princes and others.
AVith Copious Notes, an Introduction, and
By William Brenciiley
Etchings.
Rye, Assistant Keeper of the Department
of Printed Books, British Museum.
Thick
foolscap 4to, elegantly printed by JVhit-
tingham, extra cloth.

153

" This curious volume has been the labour of

a
scholar's love, and will be read with case by all.
The idea of assembling the testimonies of foreign
visitors, and showing us how we appeared to others
ki the days of Bess, by way of contrast and compari-
son to the aspect wc present in the days of Victoria,
was one which involved much arduous research. Mr.
Rye had had no predecessor.

[e has not only added an introduc-
tion to the works he assembles and translates, but has
enriched them with some hundred pages of notes on
all kinds of subjects, exhibiting a wide and minute
research."

Fortnightly Rcvieiv. (G. H. Lewes.)

A book replete bolhjwith information and amusement,
furnishing a series of very curious pictures of England
iu the Uldca 'limty"^Notts and Querits,

Books 071 Sale at Smith's^ 36, SoJio Square, London.

ENGLISH COINS. — A Guide to the
Study and Arrangement of English Coins.
By H. W. Henfrey, Member of the Nu-
mismatic Society of London. With 'plates
and woodcuts, post 8vo, doth.

7s 6d

A very useful and compendiousHistory of English Coins,
and what will interest collectors, it gives the price the
rarest coins have sold for in auctions of late years.

ENGLISH RETRACED, or Remarks
on the " Breeches" Bible (the Genevan
Version) and the English of the present
day.

Post 8vo, cloth.

2s (pub at 5s)

An ingenious and instructive volume, the result of a

good deal of reading.

EPITAPHS—NORFOLK'S (H. E.) Glean-
ings in Graveyards : a Collection of Cu-
Third Edition, revised
rious Epitaphs.
and enlarged, fcap. 8vo, cloth.

3s

EPITAPHS. —A Collection of Curious
and Interesting Epitaphs copied from
the Monuments of Distinguished and
Noted Characters in the Ancient Church
and Burial Grounds of Saint Pancras,
Middlesex. By F. T. Cansick. Post 8vo,
plates, cloth.

7s 6d

Large Paper, 4to, cloth.
VOL II (Completing the Parish
of St Pancras, including iBghgate Ceme-
tery).

15s

7s 6d

15s

Post 8vo, cloth.

—Large Paper 4to, cloth.
ESSAYS on the DRAMA.

BY W
Bonhak Donne {the present Licenser of
Plays). Post 8vo, cloth. 2s (original price
6s)
Contents : — Athenian Comedy ; Beaumont and
Fletcher ; Plays and their Providers ; Songs from the
Dramatists ; The Drama ; Charles Kemble ; The
Drama Past and Present ; Popular Amusements.

ESSEX.—HADFIELD (JAMES, Architect)
Ecclesiastical Architecture of the County
of Essex, from the Norman Era to the
Sixteenth Century, with Plans, Eleva-
tions, Sections, Details, &c., from a Series
of Measured Drawings, and Architectural
and Chronological Descriptions.
Eoyal
4to, 80 plates,
leatJier hack, cloth sides.
£l. llsOd

ESSEX.—The Parish of Waltham Abbey,
its History and Antiquities. By James
Maynard. Post 8vo, enfjraviufjs, sewed.
Is— cloth.

23

EVANS (JOHN, F.S.A., Secretary to the Nu-
mismatic Society) Coins of the Ancient
Jiritons, Arranged and Dcscrilted. Thick
8vo, many plates, enrjravcd by F. JV. Fair- .
holt, F.S.A., and cuts, cloth, a handsoiae
volume.

£l. Is

The " Prix dc Numi^matiquc" has brcn awarded hy
Ucllcs

tlic French Academic dc» Inscriptions ct
Lcttrca, to the author, for this book.

INLAYSON (JAMES) Surnames
and Sirenames, the Origin and His-
tory of certain Family and Historical
Names, and Remarks on the An-
cient Right of the Crown to Sanction
and Veto the Assumption of Names, and
an Historical Account of the Names of
Buggey and Bugg.
Is 6d {original
price 3s 6d)

8vo.

but

chiefly

FRENEAXJ (PHILIP) Poems on Various
Subjects,
of
the Events and Actors in the American
War of Independence, reprinted from the
rare edition printed at Philadelphia in
Thick fcap. 8vo,
1786, with a Preface.
elegantly printed, cloth.
63

illustrative

Frcncau enjoyed the friendship of Adams, Franklin.
Jefferson, Madison, and Munroe, and the last three
were his constant correspondents while they lived.
His Patriotic Songs and Ballads, which were superior
to any metrical compositions then written in America,
were everywhere sung
See
Griswold's " Poets and Poetry of America," and
Duyckinck's " Cyclop, of American Literature."

enthusiasm.

with

ILES (REV. DR.) The Writings
of the Christians of the Second
Centur)'-, namely, .Athenagoras, Ta-
tian, Theophilus, Hermias, Papias,
A.ristides, Quadratus, etc., collected and
first translated,
cloth.
7s 6d

complete.

8vo,

Designed as a continuation of Abp. Wake's Apostolical

Epistles, which are those of the first century.

GILES (REV. DR.) Heathen Records
to the Jewish Scripture History, con-
taining all the Extracts from the Greek
and Latin Writers in which the Jews and
Christians are named, collected together
and translated into English, with
the
original Text in juxtaposition.
8vo,
cloth.

7s 6d

GILES (REV. DR.) Codex Apocryphus
Novi Testament! the Uncanonical (gos-
pels and other
Writings referring to
the First Ages of Christianity, in the ori-
ginal Languages of Arabic, Greek, and
Latin, collected together from the editions
of Fabricius, Thilo and others.
2 vol.'^,
8vo, cloth.

143

GRENVILLE (HENRY) A Chronolo-
gical Synop.sis ol" tlie Four (u).'^j)ols, on a
new])lan, with Notes.
Is 6il
The most useful and coniprwiiensirc ."synopsis ever nuh-
lie found of great utility to Preachers

8v(), cloth.

lishcd, it will
and Students in Divinity.

GUDE AND GODLIE BALLATES, a
Coniiiciidiou.s liook of P.salni.s and Sj»iiil-
ual Songs commonly known as " The
(lude and Godlie Bullates,"
Reprinted
from Kdinlnirgh edition of 1578, willi
Glossary, etc., by Uuvid
Introchiclion,
Laing.

Fcp. 8v(), c^y^/t.

.?i Cd

Books on Sale at SiiiitKSf 36, So7io Square, London,

10
GWYNN AND OTWAY. — A Memo-
rial of Nell Qwyniie the Actres.s, and
Thomas Otway the Dramatist. By W. H.
Hart. 4to.

6d

HANTS.—AN Extension of the Latii

text and an English
o
the Domesday Book for Hampshire, wit]
notes by H. Moody. 4to, cloth.

translation

7s 6d

AIGH'S (DANIEL HENRY, M.A.)
The Conc[iiest of Britain by the
Saxons. A Harmony of the History
of the Britons, the Works of Gildas,
the "Brut," and the Saxon Chronicle,
with reference to the Events of the Fifth
and Sixth Centuries. 8vo, 'plates of Runic
Inscriptions^ cloth.

15s

HANTS.—BAIGENT (F. J., of Winchester
History and Antiquities of the Parisl
Church of Wyke, near Winchester.
8vo
engravings.

2s 6d

HANTS. —WILLIAM KUFUS, hii
Tomb in Winchester Cathedral, Accoun
of the Opening, &c. By T. W. llichards
8vOy 36 pp., 3 plates, sewed.

Is Cd

HAIGH'S (DANIEL HENRY, M.A.) The
The Anglo-Saxon Sagas, an Examination
of their value as aids to History, serving
as a Sequel to " The Conquest of Britain
by the Saxons."

8vo, cloth.

8s 6d

It analyses and throws new historical evidence on the
origin of the Poems of Beowulf, the Lament of Ueor,
the Saga of Waldhere, Scyld Scefing, the fight at
Finnesham, the Story of Horn, the Lay of Hilde-
brand, etc.

HALLIWELL'S (J. O., F.R.S., dec.)
Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial
Words, Obsolete Phrases, Proverbs, and
Ancient Customs, from the Reign of
Edward I.
2 vols, 8vo, containing up-
wards of 1,000 pages, closely printed in
double columns, cloth, a new and cheaper
edition.

153

It contains above 50,000 words (embodying all the
known scattered glossaries of the English language),
forming a complete key for the reader of our old Poets,
Dramatists, Theologians, and other authors, whose
works abound with allusions, of which explanations
are not to be found in ordinary Dictionaries and
books of reference. Most of the principal Archaisms
are illustrated by examples selected from early in-
edited MSS. and rare books, and by far the greater
portion will be found to be original authorities.

HALLIWELL'S (J. O.) The Manuscript
Rarities of the University of Cambridge.
8vo, bds.

3s (original price 10s 6d)

A companion to Hartshorne's " Kook Rarities" of the

same university.

HALLIWELL'S (J. O.) A Dictionaiy of
of Old English Plays, existing either in
print or in manuscript, from the earliest
times to the close of the 17th Century, in-
cluding also notices of Latin Plays writ-
ten by English Authors during the same
period, with particulars of their Authors,
Plots, Characters, &c.

Svo, cloth.

12s

Twenty-five copies have been printed on thick paper,

price £1. IS.

HALLIWELL'S (J. O.) Introduction to
Fcp. Svo,
Is 6d {original price

the Evidences of Christianity.
2nd Edition, cloth.
3s Cd)

The only book which contains in a popular form the
Ancient Heathen unconscious testimonies to the truth
ofCiuistiauity.

HART'S (W. H.) Index Expur^atoriu:
Anglicanus, or a Descriptive Catalogue
of the Principal Books printed or pub
in England, which have beei
lished
Suppressed, or Burnt by the Commoi
Hangman, or Censured, or for which tli'
Autlior, Printer, or Pul)lishcr have beei
Prosecuted.

8vo, Part I.

2s

H A R T L I B.—A Biographical Memoi

j\lilton's

of Samuel Ilartlib,
familia
friend, with Bibliographical Notices o
Works published by him, and a reprint o
his Pamphlet entitled " An Invention o
Engines of Motion." By Henry Dircks
C.E., author of the Life of the Marquis o
Worcester, &c.

Post 8vo, cloth.

3s Gd

To have been the familiar friend of Milton, the coi
respondent of I'oyle and Evelyn, Pepys and Wren
and to have had the honour of suggestin;^ to Milto
his tract on Education, and of receiving his hij;h prais
in his own lofty and sonorous language, is honou
enough to make Hartlib's name and life worthy of
special work.

HEARNE. — Reliquse Hearnians3.
Hearne,

Th(
Remains of Thomas
(th'
of Edmund Hall
Antiquary)
Oxon, being Extracts from his Diaries
Edited by Dr. P. Bliss, late Principal o
St. Mary Hall. Second edition, wiU
additions and a new index. 3 vols, fcp. 8vc
port., cloth. 15s

M.A.,

Large paper, 3 vols, post Svo, cloth

£1. 2s 6d

One of the most gossipping diaries that has ever bcc*

published more so to those fond of bibliogmiiby.
graphy, and antiquities. Poor Tom's invctcrale j
binical tendencies often led him into amusing scrape:

HERALDRY OF SMITH, being: a
Collection of the Arms borne by, or attri
buted to most Families of that Surn;im
in Great Britain, Ireland, and German}
compiled from the Harleian MSS., an-
other Authentic Sources. By H. Sydne
Grazebrook.
Small 4to, clcgantUj prin
ted in antique type by WTiittingJiam, cloth
15s

The above work contains a correct heraldic dcscriptio
of the Armorial Insignia of nearly every known arm
gcrous Family of the surname of Smith, Suiytb, etc
(about 350 ill number) £(A«ii3illt^:>trated with32 plate

BooTcs on Sale at Smith's, 36, Sofio Square, London.

comprising 125 Shields of Arms copied in facsimile
from a curious manuscript in the Harieian Collection
m the British Museum.
A ffny copies are issued with the Arms coloured, for

which early application is necessary.

Price £2. 2s

HERALDRY of SMITH of Scotland with
By F. M.

Genealogical Annotations.
Smith, Capt., E. A.

4to, 3s 6cl

Forming a supplement to H. S. Grazebrook's Heraldry

of bmith (the previous article.)

HERBERT'S (Hon. Algernon)

Cydo'ps
Chrishanus, or an Argument to
dis-
prove the sui^posed Antiquity of Stone-
henge and other Megalithic
Erections
in England and Brittany.
8vo, cloth,
4s (original price 6s)

HEREFORD.—Helps to* Hereford His-
tory, Civil and Legendary, in an Ancient
Account of
the Ancient-Cordwainers'
Company of the City, the Mordiford Dra-
gon, and other Subjects. By J. D. Dev-
lin. 12mo, cloth (a curious volume). 3s 6d
HERRICK.—Hesperides, The Poems and
other Eemains of EoLert Herrick, now
first collected and edited by W. Carevv
Hazlitt.
8vo, frontispiece
after Marshall, cloth.

2 vols, fcap.

8s.

Lauge paper, 2 vols, post 8vo, cloth.

153

HOMER.—THE ILIADS OF HOMER,
rrince of Poets, never before in any lan-
guage truly translated, with a Comment
on some of his chief Places. Done accor-
ding to the Greek by George Chapman,
with Introduction and Notes by tlie Rev.
RiCHAiiD Hooper.
2 vols, sq. fcp. 8vo.
Second and revised Edition, with por-

^^

12s

trait of Chapman, and frontispiece.
" The translation of Homer, publisiicd by George
Chspnian, is one of the greatest treasures the English
language can hodiSt."— Godwin.

"With Chapman, Pope had frequent consultations,
and perhaps never translated any passage till he read
his version.''—Z>n Jolmson.
*' He covers his defects with a daring, fiery spirit, that
animates his translation, which lis something like
what one might imagine Homer himself to have writ
before he arrived at years of discretion."—/'^/c.
Chapman's translation, with all its defects, is often
exccrr'hiigly Homeric, which Pope himself seldom
(ilu.im.'l."— //«//rt:»f.
"Chapman writes and feels as a Poet—as Homer might
have written had \\t lived in England in the reign
of Queen yAizahclh."—Co/cri(/i'e.
"I have just finished Chapman's Homer. Did you ever
read it ?— it has the most continuous power of interes-
ting you all along.
. The earnestness and
jKision which he has put into every part of these
I>ocm« would be incredible to a reader of
a mere
modern translation."— C/*ar/« Lamb.

.

.

HOMER'S ODYSSEY, Translated ac-
cording to the. (Jie(!k
]jy Geor<;jo (Jiiai'-
MAN.
With Introduction and Notes by
Kev. RrcfiARD Hooper.
2 v^)l^^, scp fc}).
8vo, Second and lt«;vi.si;d Edition, vnih
facisindlc of Uig rare original fruntispiacc.
12s

:

tire.

11
HOMER'S Battle of the Frogs and Mice -
Hesiod's Works and Days; Mus^us's
Hero and Leander ; Juvenal's Fifth Sa-
Translated by George Chapman.
Square

Edited by Eev. EiCH. Hooper.
fcp. 8vo, frontispiece after Pass,
"The Editor of these five rare volumes has done an in-
calculable service to English Literature by taking
Oeorge Chapman's folios out of the dust of time ho-
noured libraries, by collatiHg them with loving care and
patience, and through the agency of his enterprising-
publisher, bringing Chapman entire and complete
within the reach of those who can best appreciate and
least afford
early editions."—
A tnejiaeiiin.

to purchase the

6s

HORNE'S (R. H.)

Ballad Romances.
12nio, pp. 248, cloth. 33 {prig, 'price 6s 6d)
" Containing the Noble Heart, a Bohemian Legend
the Monk of Swineshead Abbey, a Ballad Chronicle
of the Death of King John ; The three Knights of
Camelott a Fairy Tale: The Ballad of Delora^ of the
Passion of Andrea Como ; Bedd Gelert, a Welsh Le-
FK"i,V-'^^r"^^?5''"' ^ ^^"^^ oft^e Night Watch ;
Pure fancy of the most abundant and picturesque de-
Mr. Home should write us more fairy
scription.
tales: we know none to equal him since the days of
Drayton and Herrick."—Examiner.
The opening poem in this volume is a fine one, it is
entitled the ' Noble Heart' and not only in title but
in treatment well imitates the style of Beaumont and
l^letcher. —Athen/eum.

"^ Woodlands, a Child's Story.

« B

^^

RISH FAMILIES.—D'ALTON'S
(John, Barrister-at-LaWy of Dublin)
Illustrations, Historical and Gene-
alogical, of the most ancient Fami-
lies of Ireland (500) Members of which
held Commissions in King James's Ser-
vice in the War of the Revolutions, where-
in their respective Origin, Achievements,
Forfeitures, and nltimate Destinies, are
set forth. 2 thick vols, 8vo. Second Edi-
tion, pp. 1400, cloth..

£1. Is

ISLE OF MAN.—HALLIWELL'S (J. O
Roundabout Notes, chielly upon the An>
cient Circles of Stones in the Isle of Man.
Fcp. 4to, only 100 printed.

2s

JOHNES (ARTHUR J.) Philological
Trools of the original Unity and Recent
Origin of the Human Race, derived from
a Comparison of the Languages of Europe,
Asia, Africa, and America.
8vo, cloth.
6s {original price 12s Cd)

Printed at the su^^gestion of Dr. Prilchard, to whose

works it will be found a useful supplement.

JONES (REV.

H. LONGUEVILLE.)
Essays and Papers on Literary and His-
torical
291, cloth.
4s Gd {original price 12s)

8vo, pp.

Subjects.

«'C'»)NTKNT«!:— How to build a Ifousc .and Live in it-
like a Country House— Sketches in old
Kill and the K.istile. I'Jacc de l.i Grcvc,
IM.iiicrii
I'Vaure,
Ml, and Swit/crl.iiid--'J'|je J)iiicii Critics of the
i/lh, and luih C'ciiiiiiiLi.
Literary Labours of

.StiKj.ils

Art

of

in

.;

.

iLu iicucUiClUic: .

—

12

Books on Sale at Smith's, 36, Soho Sqmre, London.

ELLY (WM., of Leicester) Notices
illustrative of the Drama, and other
Popular Amusements, chiefly in
the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Cen-
incidentally illustrating^ Shake-
turies,
speare and his Contemporaries, Extracted
from the Chamberlain's Accounts and
other Manuscripts of the Borough of Lei-
cester, -with an Introduction and Notes.
Post 8vo, i^latcs, cloth.

9s

KENRICK (REV. JOHN, Curator of Anti-
quities in the Museum at York, author of
" Ancient Egypt under
the Pharaohs,'^
"History of Phoenicia^^ &c.) Papers on Sub-
jects of Archceolof^y and History commu-
nicated to the Yorkshire Philosophical
(Original
Society.
price 9s.)

8vo, cloth.

33 6d.

The Rise, Extension, and Suppression of the Order of

Contents.

Knights Templars in Yorkshire.

Historical Traditions of Pontefract Castle, including an
Enquiry into the Place and Manner of Richard the
Second's Death.

Relation of Coins to History, illustrated from Roman

Coins found at Methal, in Yorkshire.

The Causes of the Destruction of Classical Literature.
The History of the Recovery of Classical Literature.
The Reign of Trajan, illustrated by a monument of his

reign found at York,

Roman Wax Tablets found in Transylvania.
New Year's Day in Ancient Rome.

KE N T.— LAMBARDE'S (WILLIAM,
Lawyer and Antiquary) A Perambulation
of Kent,
the Description,
Hystorie, and Customs of that Shire.
Written in 1576.
53
{original 'price 12s)

Thick 8vo, cloth.

containing

The first county history published, and one of the most
amusing and naive old books that can be imagined.

KENT.—SMITH (J.

R.)

Bibliotheca
Cantiana.—A Bibliographical Account of
what has been published on the History,
Topography, Antiquities, Customs, and
Family Genealogy of the County of Kent,
with Biographical Notes.
8vo, (pj). 370)
with two plates of facsimiles of autographs
o/33 eminent Kentish writers.
5s (original
price 14s)

KENT.—Liber Estriae, or Memorials of
the Royal Ville and Parish of Eastry, in
By W. F. Shaw,
the County of Kent.
Eastry. A handsome
M.A., Vicar of
volume, elegantly printed, ^io,plates, cloth.
.£1. 8s

KENT.—SANDYS' (C.) Critical Disserta-
tion on Professor Willis's "Architectural
History of Canterbury Catliedral.''
8vo.
2s 6d

"Written in no quarrelsome or captious spirit: the
highest compliment is paid to Professor Willis where
Ikit the author has made out a clear case,
it is due.
in some very important instances, of inaccuracies tliat
have led the learned Professor into the construction
It may be considered
of serious errors thoiighout.
as an indispensable companion to his volume, con-
taining a great deal of extra information of a very
curious kind. "

A 7-t- Union.

KENT.—CONSUETUDINES KANCIiE.
A History of Gavelkind, and other remark-
able Customs, in the County of Kent.
By Charles Sandys, of Canterbury. 8vo,
illustrated with facsimiles, a very handsome
volume, cloth.

15s.

KENT.—A Register of the Lands held
by Catholics and Nonjurors in the County
of Kent in the Reign of George the I.,
edited by W. H. Hart, F.S. A. 8vo, pp. 43,
sewed.

Is

KENT.-KNOCKER'b (EDW., Toicn Cleric
of Dover) Account of the Grand Court oi
Shepway, holden on Bredonstone Hill, at
Dover, for the Installation of Viscount
Palmerston as Constable of Dover and
Warden of the Cinque Ports, in 1861.
With Notes on the Origin and Antiquity
of the Cinque Ports, Two Ancient Towns,
and their Members.
Foolscap 4to, en-
gravings, elegantly printed hy Whittingham^
cloth.

15s

KENT. — Caesar's

subsequent

British Expeditions
from Boulogne to
the Bay of Apul-
dore, and the
formation
Geologically of Romney Marsh. By F. H.
Appach, M.A. Post 8vo, map, cloth. 4s Gd
KEN T.—A History of the Weald of
Kent, with an Outline of the Early His-
tory of the Country. By Robert Furley,
F.S.A., also a Sketch of the Physical
Features of the District, by Henry B.
Mackeson, F.G.S., thick 8vo, with maps,
vol 1 (to be completed in 2 vols), cloth. 12s
KENT. — Passages from the Autobio-
graphy of a "Man of Kent,'' (Robert
CowTAN of the British Museum) togethei!
with a few rowgh Pen and Ink Sketcj;
by the same hand of some of the peo]
he has met, the changes he has seen, anti
places he has visited, 1817-1865.
the
Thick post 8vo.
5s. (original price
lOs 6d)

Cloth.

KENT.—Some Account of Stone Church
By G. E. Street, Archi

near Dartford.
tect.

Im-p Svo, fine engravings. 53

KENT. — History

of

Fraternity
of the Assumption of the Blessed Yirgii
Mary at Hytlie. By H. B. Mackeson
F.G.S. 8vo, facsimile of the MIS.
Is 6<

the

The curious documents here analyzed are of a class <
which only two are known to exist in the Recor
Oflice, wliere they are regarded as of great interc
and value.

KENT.—An Essay on the Tragedy o
I

Favcrsham."

By C.

"Ardeu of
Donne. 8vo.

Is

^

—

—
—

—

—
—
—

—
—

—

Books on Sate at SmiiJis, 86, SoJio Square, London.

KENT, SUSSEX, & SURREY.—HUSSEY
(Rev, Arthur) Notes on the Churches in
the Counties of Kent, Sussex, and Surrey
mentioned in Domesday Book, and those
of more recent date ; with some Account
of the Sepulchral Memorials and other
Thick 8vo, fine plates, .cloth.
Antiquities.
12s {original price IBs)

iJANCASHIRE.—BUTTON (W., of
Derby) Description of Blackpool,
8vo, Zrd edition.
in Lancashire.
Is6d

LATHBURY'S (REV. THOMAS) His-
tory of the Nonjurors : their Controversies
and Writings, mth Remarks on some of
the Rubrics in the Book of Common
Prayer.
6s {original
price 14s)

Thick Svo, cloth.

LATHBURY'S (REV. T.) History of the
Convocation of the Church of England
from the Earliest Period to the Year 1742.
Second edition, with considerable additions.
Thick Svo, cloth.
5s {original price 12s)

LAWRENCE (SIR JATHLE^, Knight ofMalta)
On the Nobility of the British Gentry, or
the Political Ranks and Dignities of the
British Empire compared with those on
the Continent.

Post Svo.

2s

Useful for foreigners in Great Britain, and to Britons
abroad, particularly those who desire to
be pre-
sented at Foreign Courts, to accept Foreign Military
Service, to be invested with Foreign Titles, to be ad-
to purchase Foreign
mitted into
Property, or to Intermarry with Foreigners.

foreign orders,

LETTERS of the KINGS of ENGLAND—
Now first collected from the Originals in
Royal Archives, and from other Autlien-
tic Sources, Private as Avell as Public.
Edited, with Historical Introduction and
Notes, by J. O. Halliwell.
Tivo hand-
some volumes, post Svo, with portraits of
Henry VIII. and Charles I.,
8s
(original price £1. Is)

cloth.

These volumes form a good companion to Ellis's Original

Letters.

The collection comprises, for the first time, the love-
letters of Henry VIII. to Anne Bolcyn, in a complete
form, which may be regarded, perhaps, as the most
sipj^uiar documents of the kind that h.ive descended
to our times ; the scries of letters of Edward VI. will
be found very interesting specimens of composition ;
some of the letters of James I., hitlicrto ull])^lllli^.h(.•<l,
throw light on the Murder of Ovcrbury, and prove
beyond a doubt the King was imjjlicated in it in some
extraordinary and unpleasant way ; but his Letters
to the Duke of Buckingham arc of the most singul.ir
nature ; only imagine a letter from a .Sovereign to his
Prime Minister commencing thus ; "My own sweet
and dear child, blessing, bl'
on tiiy
hoart-roots and ail thine." 1'
iid tlie
Duke of Buckingham's Jourii'
i. never
been before so fully illustrated a?i it
is i>y the docu-
ments given in this work, whirh also inc Itidcs the
very curious letters from the Duke and Duthots of
BuckiDgluun to James I.

''

13
LIBRARY of OLD AUTHORS.
John Marston's Dramatic Works, 3 vols. 15s.
Piers Ploughman, his Vision and Creed.

2 vols.

10s.

Mather's Remarkable Providences of Early

American Colonization.

5s.

John Selden's Table Talk. 5s

LargePaper.

7s 6d

William Drummond's Poetical Works 53.
Francis Quarles' Enchiridion.
Sir Thomas Overbury's Works.
George Wither's Hymns and Songs of the

3s.

5s.

Church.

5s.

George Wither's Hallelujah.
ROBERT- Southwell's Poetical Works.
Joseph Spence's Anecdotes of Books and

4s

6s.

Men,

6s.

Large Paper.

7s 6d.

Cotton Mather's Wonders of the Invisible

World.

5s.

Resl^ins of the Early Popular Poetry of Eng-
Large Paper. £1. 10s.

land. 4 vols. £1

John Aubrey's Miscellanies.
George Chapman's Translation of Homer's

4s.

Iliad.

2 vols.

12s

Odyssey.
Battle of the Frogs, and other Pieces.

2 vols.

12s.

6s.

John Webster's Dramatic Works (more com-
Large

plete than any other). 4 vols. £1.
Paper.

£1. 10s.

John Lilly's Dramatic Works. 2 vols. 10s.

Large Paper.

15s.

Richard Crashaw's Poetical Works.
La Morte d'Arthur. — History of King
Artliiir and the Knights of the Round
Table (the only uncastrated Edition). 3
£1. 2s 6d
vols.

Large Paper.

15s.

5s.

Sackville's (Lord Buckhurst) Works.
Richard Lovelace's (The Cavalier) Poetical
Large

Works. Now first collected. 5s.
Paper.

7s 6d

4s.

Camden's Remains concerning Britain.

8th
Large Paper.

edition, new portrait. 6.s.
7s Gd.

Robert IIerrick's Poetical Works.

2 vols.

l().s.

Large Paper.

15s

Tin: Diaries op Thomas IIearne the Anti-
15s. — Large Paper.

3 vols.

fjuaiy.
£1. 2s Cd.

Rogeu Akcham's Whole Works. Now first
Large Paper.

4 vols.

£1.

collected.
£1. lO.s.

DiJcin'',s.H OK Newcastle's

ami Life of her llusbaud.
Paper.

7a (Jd.

Aiil(»l)io;.:raphy

Oh.—Larue

—

—

—

—

—

Boohs on 8ale at Smithes, 36, ^oho Square, London.

u

George Sandys' Poetical Works.

2 vols.

lOs.

Large Paper.

15s.

The Renowned Eomance of Amadis of Gaul.

3 vols.

153.

Lahge Paper.

£1. 2s 6d.

Michael Drayton's Poetical Works.

Now-

first collected, in the 20'>'ess.

All elegantly printed and carefully edited with portraits,
woodcuts and facsimiles. The title of each work is
given more fully in this Catalogue.

Ij I Ij L Y' S (JOHN the EupJust) Dramatic
Works. Now first collected, with Life and
Notes by F. W. Fairholt.
2 vols, fcp.
8vo, cloth.

10s.

Large paper, 2 vols, post 8vo, cloth.

15s

JiOVELACE (RICHARD)

Lucasta. —
The Poems of IIichard Lovelace, now
first edited and the Text carefully revised,
with Life and Notes by W. Carew
Fcp. 8vo, cloth, ivith 4 plates.
Hazlitt.
5s.

Largh paper.

Post 8vo, cloth. 7s 6d
»
LOWER'S (MARK ANTONY, 31. A., F.S.A .)
Patronymica Pritannica, a Dictionary of
Royal 8vo, 500 _2^a^(?.'?,
Family Names.
with illustrations, cloth.

£1. 5s

This work is the result of a study of British Family

Names, extending over more than twenty years.

JiOWER'S (M. A.) Curiosities of He-
Old
raldry,
With illuminated Title-
English Writers.
page, and numerous engravingsfrom designs
by the Author.

Illustrations

8vo, cloth.

from

with

14s

"Mr. Lower's work is both curious and instructive,
while the manner of its treatment is so inviting and
popular, that the subject to which it refers, which
many have hitherto had too good reason to consider
meagre and unprofitable, assumes, under the hands
of the writer, the novelty of fiction with the impor-
tance of historical truth."

Athcncviwi.

LOWER'S (M.

Contents: i.

A.)

Contributions to
Literature, Historical, Antiquarian, and
7s 6d
Metrical. Post 8vo, woodcuts, cloth.
Local Nomenclature— 2.
The llattle,
of Hastings, an Historical Essay—3.
The Lord
Dacre, his mournful end, a Ballad— 4.
Historical
and Archa:olo.G;ical Memoir on the Iron Works of the
South of England, with nuincro7is illttstrations—5.
or the Stout Abbot of
Winchclsea's Deliverance,
The South Downs, a
Eattayle, in Three Fyttes— 6.
Sketch, Historical, Anccdotical, and Descriptive— 7.
On the Yew Trees in Churchyards— S. A Lyttc
Geste of a Create Eele, a pleasaunt Ballad—9. A
Discourse of Genealogy— 10.
An Antiquarian
Pilgrimage in Normandy, 'with woodcuts— 11.
Mis-
celianea, &lc., &c.

LOWER'S (M. A.) Chronicle of Battel
Abbey, in Sussex, orit:^inally compiled
in Latin by a Monk of the Establish-
ment, and now first translated, with Notes
and an Abstract of the subsequent His-
tory of the Abbey.
8vo, with illustra-
tions, cloth.

9s

This volume, among other matters of local and general
the

interest, embraces—New Facta

relative

to

Norman invasion—The Foundation of the Monas-
tery—The Names and Reuials of the Original
Townsmen of Battel—Memoirs of several Abbots
and Notices of their Disputes with the Bishops of
Chichester, respecting Jurisdiction—The Abbey's
Possessions—A Speech of Thomas a Beckct, then
Chancellor of England, in favour of Abbot Walter de
Luci— Several Miracles— Anecdotes of the Norman
Kings—and an Historical Sketch of the Abbey, from
1176 to the present time by the Translator.

L N D O N.—Liber Albus ; the White
Book of the City of London.
Com-
piled A. D. 1419, by John Carbenter,
Common Glerh ; Pichard Whittixg-
Tran.slated from the Ori^^q-
TON, Mayor.
nal Latin and Anglo-Norman, by H. T.
lliley, M.A. 4to, pp. 672 (original j^ricc
18s) the feu remaining copies offered, in
Half morocco {Roxhurghc style)
cloth, at 9s
Whole hound in vellum., carmine
10s 6d
edges,l2s— Whole morocco, carmine edges,

133 ed

Extensively devoted to details which must of necessity
interest lliose who care to know something more about
their forefathers than the mere fact tliat tliey liave
existed. Many of them— until recently consigned to
oblivion ever since the passing away of the remote
generations to which they belonged— iiuimalcly con-
nected with the social condition, usages, and manners
of the people who— uncouth, unlearned, ill-housed,
ill-fed, and comfortless though they were, still form-
ed England's most important. most wealthy, and most
influential community throughout the chequered and
troublous times of the 13th and 14th centuries. Du-
ring this period, in fact, there is hardly a phase or
feature of English national life, upon which, in a
greater or less degree, from these pages of the
" Liber Albus," some light is not reflected.

1483,

written

in the

LONDON.—Chronicle of London, from
1089 to
15th
Century, and for the first time printed
from MSS. in the British Musemn, with
numerous Contemporary Illustrations of
Eoyal Letters, Poems, descriptive of Public
Events and Manners and Customs of the
(Edited by Sir Harris Ni-
Metropolis.
colas.)

4:io, facsimile. Ids. 15s

Only 250 copies printed.

It forms a Supplement to thr

Cluouiclcs of Ilaruuig, Craft on. Hall, and others.

L O N D O N.—History of the Church
of St. Mildred, in the Poultry, London,
with some particulars of the Church of St.
]\Tary, Colechurch, destroyed in the pjreat
By Thomas Milbourn,
Fire, A.l). 1G66.
late lion. Sec. to tlie London and Middle-
8vo, engra-
sex Archaeological Society.
vings, cloth.

9s

The large extracts from the Parish Registers will inter-
est the Genealogist, as it was an important parish in
the olden time.

LUKIS (REV. W. C.) Account of Church
P)ells, with some Notices of Wiltshire
Bells and Bell-Founders, containing a
copious list of Founders, a comparative
Scale of Tenor Bells, and Inscriptions
from nearly 500 Parishes in various jxarts
of the Kingdom.
8vo, 13 plates, cloth.
3s Gd {original price 6s)

—

Boohs on Sale at SmitKs, 36, Solio Square, London.

LYND SAY'S (SIS DAVID) Poeticai
Works, a new edition, careliilly revi:,';ccl,
etc., by David Ijaing.
2 vols, post iIjvo,
cloth.

12s

jADDEN (FRED. W., of the Medal
Room, British Museum) Handbook
to Roman Coins.
Fcap. 8vo, 'plates
of rare examples, cloth.

5s

A very useful and trustworthy guide to Roman Coins.
MARSTON'S (JOHN) Dramatic and
Poetical AVorks. Now first collected and
edited by J. O. Halltwell, F.R.S., &c.
3 vols, fcp. 8vo, cloth.

15s

"The edition deserves well of the public ; it is carefully
printed, and the annotations, although neither nume-
rous nor extensive, supply ample explanations upon a
If Mr. Halliwell had
varitey of interesting points.
done no more than collect these plays, he would have
conferred a boon upon all lovers of our old dramatic
poetry."

Literary Gazette.

MATHER'S (Dr. INCREASE) Remark-
able Providences of the Earlier Days of
American Colonization.
AA'itli Introduc-
tory Preface by George Offor. Fcp. 8vo,
Portrait, cloth.

5s

accidents,

A very singular collection of remarkable sea delive-
remarkable phenomena, witch-
rances,
craft, apparitions, &c., <fec., connected with inhabi-
tants of New England, &c., &c. A very amusing
volume, conveying a faithful portrait of the state of
society, when the doctrine of a peculiar providence
and personal intercourse between this world and that
•which is unseen was fully believed.

MATHER'S (DR. COTTON) Wonders
of the Invisible World, being an account
of the Trials of several Witchei? lately ex-
ecuted in New England, and of the seve-
tal remarkable curiosities tlierein occur-
ring. To which are added Dr. Increase
Mather's Further Account of the Tryals,
and Cases
concerning
Witchcrafts, and Evil Spirits Personating
Men.
Reprinted from the rare original
editions of 1693, with an Introductory
Preface,

Fcp. 8vo, Portrait, cloth.

Conscience

of

5s

M E N Z I E S (LOUISA J.) Legendary
Tales of the Ancient Britons, rehearsed
from the Early Chronicles.
Fcp. 8vo,
cloth.

38

Cont'-nts:

j.

Esyllt and Sabrina.

3. (Jynedda and Morgan.

three daughters.
Brothers licli and Uran.
ate.
wallon and the Final .Struggle of the Britons.

6. Alhan of Verulam.

2. Lear and his
4. The
5. tllidnre the Compassion-
8. Cad-

7. Vorli;;crn.

MICHAEL ANGELO Considered as a
Po/'i, with translations by
Se-
2h Gd {orvjinal

J'liilo.sr>}>hio
John Edward TAvr.ou.
cond Edition.
Clulh.
price 5s)

Post 8vo.

MILTON ; A Sheaf of Gloaninp^s after
By
Poat 8vo.

Uiugr.'iplicr.s and Aiiiiotators.

lii.s
tlie Uev. JosEi'U liuNTEll,
2s Cd

15
MOORE (THOMAS) — Notes from the
Letters of Thomas Moore to his Music
Publisher, James Power {the publication
of which was suppressed in London), with
an Introduction by Thomas Crofton Cro-
ker, F.S.A.

Post 8vo, cloth.

3s 6d

The impression on the mind of a reader of these Letters
of Moore in Lord Russell's edition will be not only-
incomplete, but erroneous, without the information
to be derived from this very interesting volume.

of

or Collection

ARES' (ARCHDEACON) Glos-
Words,
sary,
Phrases, Customs, Proverbs, &c.,
illustrating the Works of English
particularly Shakespeare and
Authors,
his Contemporaries. A New Edition,
with considerable
Additions, both of
By James O.
Words and Examples.
Halliwell, F.i2./S., and Thomas Wright,
M.A., F.S.A.
2 thick vols, 8vo, cloth.
£1. Is

Tlie Glossary of Archdeacon Nares is by far the best
and most useful work we possess for explaining and
illustrating the obsolete language and the customs
and manners of the i6th and 17th Centuries, and it is
quite indispensable for the readers of the literature
of the Elizabethan period. The additional words and
examples are distinguished from those in the original
The work contains
text by a t prefixed to
between five and six thousand additional examples^
the result of original research, not merely supplemen.
tary to Nares, but to all other compilations ofthe kind.

each.

NASH'S (D. W.) Taliesin,

the
Bards and Druids of Britain. A Trans-
lation of the Remains of the earliest
Welsh Bards, and an examination of the
Bardic Mysteries.

8vo, cloth.

14s

or

NASH'S (D. W.) The Pharoah of the
Exodus. An Examination of the Modern
Systems of Egyptian Chronology.
8vo,
with frontispiece of the Egyptian Calendar,
from the ceiling of the Ranuisseum, at
Thebes, cloth.

123

NEWCASTLE'S.—The Lives of William
CavOndish, Duke of Newcastle;, and of
his wife Margaret Ducliess of Newcastle,
>vritten by the thrice nobh; and illustrious,
Princess MARfjARET, Duciikss of Niow-
JCdited with a Preface and
CA8TLE.
Occasional Notes by M. A. Lower, A.M.,
(f the
etc.

Fcap. 8vo, fine

portrait

J)ur.hfss, cloth.

5s.

JiARCiK I'APER, post 8V0, clolh.

7a Cd

NOBFOLK. — On the True Derivation
<»1 the. Namof< of Towns, Villages, Kivisrs,
and otli(;r Great Natural Features of
the County of Norfolk.
J'.y i]w itev.
(ii;(). MuNFonn, Vicar of East Winch.
tivo, cloih.

4s (publiuhod ut 7ti)

Boolis on Sale at Smith's, 36, Soho Square, London.

i

—

16
N O R F L K—Analysis of Domesday
Book for the County of Norfolk. By
the Rev. George
of
East Winch. In 1 vol., 6vo, icith loedigrees
and arms, iloth.

Munford,

Vicar

lOs 6d

" Many extracts have been made, at various times, for
the illustration of local descriptions, from the great
national (but almost unlntcIligiWc; record known as
Domesday Book ; but Mr. Rlunford has done more in
the case of his own county, for he supplies a complete
epitome of the part of the survey relating to Norfolk,
giving not only the topographical and statistical facts,
but also a great deal that is instructive as to the
manners and condition of the people, the state of the
churches and other public cdilices, the mode of culti-
vation and land tenure, together with a variety of
points of interest to the ecc'csiologist and antiquary,"—
£ufy Post.

NORFOLK. — SURTEES' (Rev.

LD BALLADS.—CATALOGUE
of a unique Collection of 400 An-
cient English Broadside Ballads,
printed entirely in the IBlarU letter,
y on sale by J, Russell Smith.
AVith Notes of their Tunes, and Imprints.
Post 8vo, a handsome volume, printed
hg JVhittingham, in the old style, half
bound.

— A Copy on thick paper, without the

pirices to each, and a different title-page,
only 10 copies so printed.

10s 6d

5s

OVERBURY'S (SIR THOMAS) Works in
Prose and Verse, now first collected.
Edited, with Life and Notes, by E. F,
RiMBAULT.
Fcp. 8vo, portrait after Pass
cloth.

i)6

OXON. — GILES (REV. DR.) History
of the Parish and Town of Bampton, in
Oxfordshire, with the District and Ham-
lets belonging to it.
8vo, plates, second
7s 6d
edition, cloth.

OXON.- GILES (REV.

Histery
of Witney and its Neighbouring Parishes,
Oxon.

8vo, plates, cloth.

DR.)

Gs

OXON.—TURNER'S (Sir Gregory Page)
the

Memorandums fur

Topographical
County of Oxford.

8vo, Ids.

2s

OXON. — Memorials of the Parish of
Westcott Barton. By the Rev. Jenneii
Marshall, Lord of the Manor.
8vo,
plate of the Church, cloth.

2s 6d

EDIGREES. — BRIDGERS
(Charles) Index to the Printed
Pedigrees of English Families con-
tained in County and Local His-
tories, the " Herald's Visitations," and in
the more important Genealogical Cullec-
tons.

Thick 8vo, cloth.

10s 6d

A similar work to Sims' " Index of Pedigrees m the
What that is for
MSS. in the British Museum."
Manuscripts tiiis is for Printed Books.
It is the most
complete Indes: of its kind, and contains double the
matter of another hasty production.

PEDIGREES.—A Catalogue of Pedigrees
hitherto unindexed. By G. W. Mar-
shall.

8vo.

3a Cd

A useful supplementto Bridgcr's Index of Printed Ped-
grees as it touches books not comprehended in the
scope of that work— as the " Gentleman's Magazine"
''Notes and Queries," "Cough's Sepulchral Monu-
ments," " Family Histories," "Peerage Cases," also
those Pedigrees not in tabular form in " Morant's
Zsse.x" " Hasted's Kent," &.c

PETTIGREW (THOS. JOS.) On Super-
stitions connected with the History and
Practice of Medicine and Surgery.
8vo,
frontispiece, cloth.

4s {original p-ice 8.=;}

Scott
Cross the

F.) Julius
Channel?

Csesar, Did he

Post 8vo, cloth.

Is 6d

" In giving an answer in the negative to the above
question, we ask lor a fair and dispassionate hearing,
and in order to avoid circumlocution pass at once our
Rubicon, and propound as capable of all proof the
following historical heresy, viz., that Ceasar never set
foot at Boulogne cr Calais, never crossed the Channel,
or set eyes on Deal or Dover, but that he sailed from
the mouths of the Rhine or Scheldt, and landed in
Norfolk on both his expeditions."
JULIUS CAESAR how he sailed
from Zealand and landed in Norfolk (a
sequel to the foregoiiu/).

JULIUS CAESAR did ho CROSS
the Channel? Reviewed (a Reply to Mr.
Surtees' books). By John Wainwright.
post 8vo.

Post 8vo.

Author.

2s 6d.

Is

NOTTS.— CRESV/ELL'S (REV. S.

F.)
Collections towards tlie History of Print-
Small 4to,
ing
sewed.

in Nottinghamshire.

2s

NOTTS and YORKSHIRE.—The His-
tory and Antiquities of the Parish of
Blyth, in the Counties of Nottingham and
York, comprising Accounts of the Monas-
tery, Hospitals, Chapels, and Ancient
Tournament Field, of tlie Parish of the
Castle and Manor of Tickill, and ot" the
Family Possessions of Dc Bnili, the First
and Norman Lord thereof, together with
Biograpliical Notices of Roger Mowbray,
Philip uf Olcoles, Bishop Sanderson, John
Cromwell, and others, with Appendix of
Documents. By the Rev. John Raine,
4to, plates and pediyrces,
Vicar of BUjth.
cloth.

15s (original price, £l. Gs)

Large Paper, royal 4to.

£1. 5s

These copies ha\e an additional view of the Remains of

Scrooby Palace, not issued with the early copies.

—

NUMISMATIC CHRONICLE and Jour-
nal of the Numismatic Society. New
Series, Edited by W. S. W. Vaux, John
Evans, and F. W. Madden. Nos.
1 to
5^ per Number
48 Published Quarterly.
This is the only repertory of Numismatic intelligence
ever published in England.
It contains p.apers on
coins and medals, of all ages and countries, by the
first Numismatic of the day, both English and Foreign
Odd parts may be had to complete a few of ibis and it

former series ia 20 voh.

—

—

—

Books on Sale at Smit/Vs, 36, Soho Sqicare, London,

17

PETTIGREW'S Biographical Memoirs
of the most celebrated Physicians, Sur-
geons, &c., who have contributed to the
advancement of Medical Science. Imp.
8vo, 25 fine portraits^ cloth.

7s 6d

PETTIGREW (THOS. JOS.) Inquiries
into the particulars connected with the
Death of Amy Robsart (Lady Dudley)
at Cumnor Place, Berks., Sept. 8, 1560 ;
of the Calumnies
being a
charged against Sir Robert Dudley, An-
thony Forster, and others.

refutation

8vo.

2s

2 vols, fcp. 8vo, cZo^/i.

PIERS PLOUGHMAN. — The Vision
and Creed of PIERS PLOUGHMAN.
Edited by Thomas Wright ; a new edi-
tion, revised, with additions to the Notes
and Glossary.
10s
"The Vision of Piers Ploughman" is one of the most
precious and interesting monuments of the English
Language and Literature, and also of the social and
political condition of the country during the four-
teenth century
But its time of composition can, by internal evidence
be fixed at about the year 1362. On this and on all
matters bearing upon the origin and object of the
poem, Mr. Wright's historical introduction gives am-
ple information."

Literary Gazette.

PILGRIM FATHERS.—HUNTER (Rev.
Joseph, F.S.A.) The Pilgrim Fathers-
Collections concerning the Church or Con-
gregation of Protestant Separatists formed
at Scrooby, in North Nottinghamshire, in
the time of James I., the Founders of
New Plymouth, the Parent Colony of
England.
8vo, with view of the Archie-
piscopal Palace at Scrooby inserted^ cloth.
6s

This work contains some very important particulars of
these personages, and their connections previously to
their leaving England and Jlolland, which were en-
tirely unknown to former writers, and have- only re-
cently been discovered through the indefatigable exer-
Prefixed to the volume are some
tions of the author.
beautiful Prefatory Stanzas by Kicliard Moacktou
Milncs, Esq., M.P. (now Lord Houghton).

PIOZZI.—Love Letters of Mrs. Piozzi
(Iwiiiicily Mrs. Tliialc, the friend of Dr.
Jolinsoii), written when she was eighty
to the liandsome actor, William Augustus
Conway, aged Twenty-seven.
Edited by
AV. A. CiiATTO.
8vo, sewed.
23

written at three, four, and five o'clock (in the
morning) by an octogcnary pen ! a heart (as Mrs.
Lcc says) twenty-six years old, and as H. L. P. feel.s
it to be, ailyour own."—Letter V.,yd. I'eb. i8.!0.
'i'his is one of the most extraordinary collections ofllove
epistles we have chanced to meet with, and the well
known literary reputation of the lady— the Mrs.
Thraic of Doctor Johnson and Mi.ss Hurncy celebrity
— considerably enhances their interest. The letters
themselves it is not easy to characterise: nor sh.dl
we venture to decide whether they nu>re besjieak tlic
<Jrivclling of dotage, or the folly of love ; in either
case they present human nature to us under a new as-
pect, and furiiish one of those riddles which nothing
yet dreamt of in our philosophy can Mtikfaclorily
solve."

rolylechnic Review.

POPE.—Facts and Conjectures on the
Descent and Family Connections of Pope,
.By the Rev. Joseph Hunter.
the Poet.
Post 8vo.
2s

POPE.—Additional Facts concerning- tlie
Maternal Ancestry of Pope, in a Letter
By Robert Davies,
to Mr. Hunter.
F.S.A.
2s

Post 8vo.

3s

and

Anglo-Norman,

POPULAR TREATISES ON SCIENCE,
written during the Middle Ages, in Anglo-
Saxon,
English.
Edited by Thomas AVright, M.A. 8vo,
cloth.
Contents. —An Anglo-Saxon Treatise on Astronomy
of the Tenth Century, now first published from a
MS. in the British Museum, with a translation.
Livre des Creatures, by Phillippe de Thaun, now first
printed, with a translation (extremely valuable to
Philologists, as being the earliest specimens of Anglo-
Norman remaining, and explanatory of all the sym-
bolical signs in early sculpture and painting) : the
Bestiary of Phillippe de Thaun, with a translation;
Fragments on Popular Science from the Early En-
glish Metrical Lives of the Saints (the earliest piece
of the kind in the English Language.)

PORTRAITS OF ILLUSTRIOUS PER-
sons in English History, drawn by G. P.
Harding, F.S.A., from original Pictures,
with Biographical and Historical Notices,
by Thomas Moule, F.S.A.
In a hand-
some roy. 4to volume, hound in cloth extra,
levelled edges, and gilt leaves.

£1. Is

Contents : King Henry VIIL and the Emperor Charles
Sir Robert Dudley, son of the Earl of
the Fifth.
Leicester, Queen Catherine of Aragon.
Sir William
Sir Anthony
Russell, Lord Russell of Thornhaugh,
Anthony Browne, Viscount Montagu.
Browne.
Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle.
Sir
Sir Charles Scarborough, M.D.
Anthony Shirley.
Henry Carey, Viscount Falkland.
Flora Macdonald,
the preserver of Prince Charles Stuart. William Lcn-
thall, Speaker of the House of Commons, 1649.
Ed-
William Camden, Anti-
ward Vere, Earl of Oxford.
quary.

Su- Thomas Browne, of Norwich, M.D.

Separate prints may be had on folio, India paper proofs

3s 6d each.

POSTE'S (REV. BEALE, M. A.) Britan-
nic Researches ; or new Facts and Rectifi-
cations of Ancient British History.
8vo
(])p. 44S). witJi engravings, cloth.

15s

"'ihe author of this volume may justly claim credit for
considcraljle learning, great industry, and above all,
gre.it faith in the interest and importance of his sub-
On various points he has given us
ject
additional informalioii, jiiidaffortiedus new views, for
which we are bound to thank him.
'J'he body of the
book is followed by a very complete index, .so as to
render reference to any part of it easy : this was the
more necessary, on account ot the multifariousness
of the toi)ics treated, the variety of persons meuliuncd
and the many works (juoted."

Athcitaeum.

POSTE'S (REV. B.) Brittannia Antiqua
or Aiicit'iit Jhitain hi'diiglit within the
Limits of Authentic History,
bvo (pp.
38G), 9na;>, cloth.

148

A Sc<iucl to the foregoing work.

POSTE'S Vindication of tho "Celtic In-
Rcription.s on (Ju'ilish and British Coins."
bvOfi'latcs and culu, cloth.

Is

18

Boohs on Sale at Smithes, 36, Soho Square, London.

—

POSTE'S (REV. B.) Celtic Inscriptions
on Gaulish and British Coins, intended
to supply materials for the Early His-
tory oi' Great Britain, with a Glossary
of Archaic Celtic Words, and an Atlas of
Coins. 8vo, many engravings, cloth. 10s 6d
I^KOVENCAL.—A Hand-book to the Mo-
dern Provengal Language, spoken in the
South of France, Piedmont, &c., comprising
a Grammar, Dialogues, Legends, Vocabu-
laries, &c., useful for English Tourists and
Roy.
others.
12mo, doth.

By Rev. J. D. Craig.

3s 6d

This little book is a welcome addition to our literature
of comparative philology in this country, as we have
hitherto had no grammar of the sweet lyrical tongue
of Southern France.

PROVINCIAL DIALECTS OF

ENGLAND.

A DICTIONARY of Archaic and Provincial
Bj'' J. O
Words, Obsolete Phrases, etc.
Halliwell, F.R.S., &c. 2 vols, 8vo, 1000
pp. in double columns, seventh edition
cloth.

GLOSSARY of Provincial and Local Words
Used in England. By F. Grose, F.S.A,,
with which is now incorporated the Sup-
plement. By Samuel Pegge, F.S.A.
Post 8vo, cloth.

15s

4s 6d

4s

SrECI]\lENS of Cornish Provincial Dialect,
collected and arranged by Uncle Jan
Treenodle, with some Introductory Re-
marks and a Glossary by an Antiquarian
also a Selection of Songs and
Friend ;
other Pieces connected with Cornwall.
Post 8vo, with a curious portrait of Dolly
Pentreath, cloth.
CUMBERLAND BALLADS. By Robert
Anderson, with Autobiography, Notes,
Edited by Sidney Gil-
and Glossary.
tin.

Fcp. 8vo, cloth.

THE Folk Speech of Cumberland, and some
Districts adjacent, being short Stories and
Rhymes in the Dialects of the West Bor-
der Counties. By Alex. Craig Gibson,
Post 8vo, second edition, cloth.
F.S.A.
3s Gd

'* CUMBERLAND TALK," being Short Talcs
and Rh3mies in the Dialect of that County,
by JonN Richardson, of St. John's.
Fcp. 8vo, cloth.
NATHAN HOGG'S Letters and Poems in the
The Fifth Edition,
Coloured

Devonshire Dialect.
with additions.
wrapper.

3s 6d

Post

8vo.

2s

Is

"These letters, which havcachievcd considerable popu-
larity, evince an extensive acquaintance with the ver-
nacular of the county and its idioms and phrases,
while the continuous flow of wit and humour through-
out cannot fail to operate forcibly upon the risible
In the Witch story Nathan
faculties of the reader.
is to be hoped we liavc
has excelled himself, and it
nut scaB hu last aflbrt iu this branch of local English
liteaaluiv. Wu wtffmtMtm^ Jp^!!% Voggis and Jaa

Is

Plvv)oi4th AJail.

Plant are most {iraphically and amusingly portrayed,
and the various incidents whereby theintluence ol the
" Evil Eye" is .sought to be counteracted, are at once
ludicrous and irresistible."
NATHAN HOGG'S NewSeries of Poem^5 in the
Devonshire Dialect, including the Witch
Story of Mucksy Lane, and the Kenton
Dedicated by Permission to his
Ghost.
Highness Prince Louis Lucien Bonaparte.
Post 8vo, ^th edition enlarged, coloured
wrapper.

A GLOSSARY of Words used in Teesdale, in
the County of Durham. By F. T. Dins-
dale. Post 8vo, cloth. 23 6d {orig. price 6s)
POEMS of Rural Life in the Dorset Dialect.
By the Rev. William Barnes, of Came
Third Collection.
Rectory,
Fcp. 8vo, second edition, cloth.

4s 6d
JOHN NOAKES and Mary Styles, a Poem,
exhibiting some of the most striking lin-
gual localisms peculiar to Essex, with a
Glossary. By Charles Clark, Esq., of
Great Totham Hall, Essex.
Post 8vo,
cloth.

Dorchester.

Dialect,

A GLOSSARY of the Cotswold (Gloucester-
illustrated by examples
shire)
from ancient Authors. By the late Rev.
Richard Webster Huntley, A.M., of
Boxwell Court, Gloucestershire.
Cr. 8vo,
cloth.

2s

2s

3s 6d

DIALECT of South Lancashire, or Tim
Bobbin's Tummas and Meary. revised and
Corrected, with his Rhymes, and an en-
larged Glossary of Words and Phrases
chiefly used by the Rural Population of
of South
the Manufacturing Districts
Bamford.
Lancashire.
12mo, seived edition, cloth.

By Samuel

A GLOSSARY of the Words and Phrases of
Furness (North Lancashire) with illustra-
tive Quotations, principally from the Old
By J. P. Morris.
Northern Writers.
3s 6d
12mo, cloth.

A GLOSSARY of Northamptonshire Words
and Phrases, with Examples of
their
Colloquial Use, with illustrations from
various Authors, to which are added the
Customs of the County. By Miss A. E.
Baker.
IGs
{original price £1. 4s)

2 vols, post 8vo, cloth.

" The provincial dialects of England contain and pre-
serve the elements and rudiments of our compound
In Miss Baker's admirable * Northampton-
tongue.
Glossary,' we have rather a repertory of
shire
But it is much more
archaisms than vulgarisms.
than a vocabidary ; it preserves not only dialectical
peculiarities, but odd and disappearing customs; and
there is hardly a page in it which does not throw light
on some obscurity in our writers, or recall old habits
and pr3.cticcs."—C/trisiianI\Cfft0miraHccr, Quarterly
A'rr'/>7('.
RUSTIC SKETCHES, being Rhjnncs and
" Skits" on Angling and other Subjects in
one of the South-western Dialects, with a
coi)ious Glossary and general Remarks on
By G. P. R. Pulman.
Country Talk.
Post 8vo. TuiRD Edition.

3s Cd

—

"

Boohs on Sale at Smith's, 36, Soho Square, London.

Is

^ORNESS Folk, their Sayin's an' Dewin's, or
Sketches of Life and Characters
in
Lonsdale, North of the Sands. Be Eoger
PiKETAH.

12mo, sewed.

)N THE Dialect of Somersetshire, with a
Glossary, Poems, &c., exemplifying the
Dialect. By J. Jennings. Second Edition,
edited by the Kev. J. K. Jennings,
Fcp.
8vo, cloth.

. GLOSSARY of the Provincialisms of the
By W. Durrant
Post 8vo, second edition,

Sussex.

4s 6d

County of
CooPER,^F.S.A.
enlarged, cloth.

3s 6d.

9s.

i^ESTMORELAND and Cumberland.—Dia-
logues, Poems, Songs, and Ballads, by
various Writers, in the Westmoreland and
Cumberland Dialects, now first collected,
to which is added a Copious Glossary of
Words peculiar to those Counties.
Post
8vo, (pp. 408), cloth.

Printed separately from the foregoing work.

HE WESTMORELAND DIALECT, in
By Mrs. Ann
four familiar dialogues.
Wheeler, anew edition, to which is added
a Copious Glossary of Westmoreland and
Cumberland Words. Post 8vo, cloth. 3s 6d
. GLOSSARY of Provincial Words in use in
Wiltshire, showing their Derivation , in
numerous instances, from the Language
By John Yonge
of the Anglo-Saxon.
Akerman, Esq., F.S.A.
3s
HE DIALECT of Leeds and its Neighbour-
hood, illustrated by Conversations and
Tales of Conmion Life, etc., to which are
added a Copious Glossary, Notices of the
various Antiquities, Manners, and Cus-
toms, and General Folk-lore
of the
(By J. Clough Robinson.)'
District.
Thick 12mo, pp. 458, doth.

12mo, cloth.

63

Leeds Intelligencer.

This is undoubtedly the best work hitherto published
on the dialects of Yorkshire in general, and of Leeds
The author, we believe one of our
in particular.
fellow townsmen—for his introductory remarks are
dated 'Leeds, March, 1861 '—has used not only great
industry, but much keen observation, and has pro-
duced a book which will everywhere be received as .1
valuable addition to the archa;ologicaI literature of
Kngland.
GLOSSARY of Yorkshire Words and
in Whitby and its
Phrases,
Neighbourhood, with examples of their
colloquial use and allusions to local Cus-
tom.^? and Traditions. By an Inhabitant.
33 6d
(F. K. Robinson).
! GLOSSARY of the Dialect of the district
of Cleveland in tlie Nortli Riding of
Yorkshire. By the Rev. J. C. Atkinson,
Thick small 4to,
Incumbent of Danhij.
€02 pages, cloth,

12mo, cloth.

collected

£1. 43

j

GLOSSARY, with some Picco.s of Verse of
tlic Old Dialect of tli«; EngliHii Colony in
tlic Baronies of Forth mnl Bargy, Co.
Fonnerly collecte<l
Wexford, Irela'nd.
by Jacob Poole, of (irowton, now edited
! d Introduction by the; Riov.
with
W.J I
^ Author of the Dorset I'oc.ms
and UloHsary.

Fcap. hvo, cloth.

43 vA

"

19
SMITH (J. R) A Bibliographical List of all
the Works which have been published
towards illustrating the Provincial Dia-
lects of England.
1839
pARLES' (FBANCIS) Enchiri-
Institutions —
dion
Divine, Contemplative, Practical,
Moral,
Ethical, Economical, and

containing

Post 8vo.

Is

Political.

Fcp. Svo, Portrait, cloth.

3s

" Had this little book been written at Athens or Rome,
its author would have been classed with the wise of
his country."—Headlcy,

QUEEN DAGMAR'S CROSS, facsimile in
gold and colours of the Enamelled Jewel
in the Old Northern Museum, Copen-
hagen, with Introductory Remarks by
Prof. George Stephens, F.S.A.
8vo,
sewed.

3s

Q U I N T U S

SMYRNiEUS. — Select
Translations from the Greek of Quintus
Smyrnccus. By the Rev. Alexander Dyce.
12mo, Ids.

2s (original price 5s 6d)

ELiaUI-aS ANTiaU.ffi. scraps
from Ancient Manuscripts, illus-
trating chiefly Early English Li-
terature and the English Language,
8vo.

Edited by Wright and Halliwell.
Vol 11. , Nos. in 12s

Many subscribers want the' second volume. A num-

ber of odd parts of both vols, to complete copies.

REVIEW (New
RETROSPECTIVE
of Criticisms upon,
Series) consisting
Analysis of, and Extracts from, curious,
useful, valuable, and scarce Old Books.
8vo, Vols I., and II., all iirinted, cloth.
1853—54
10s 6d (original price £1. Is)
These two volumes form a good companion to the old
scries of the Retrospective, in 16 vols ; the articles aic
of the same length and character.

REYNOLDS (SIR JOSHUA) Notes
and Observations on Pictures chiefly of
the Venetian School, being Extracts from
his Italian Sketch ]5uoks; also the Rev.
W. Mason's Observations on Sir Joshua's
Method of Colouring, with some unpub-
lished Letters, of Dr. Johnson, Malono,
and others ; Wfth an Apju'udix, contain-
ing a Transcri])t of Sir.Jo.shua's Account-
Book, showing the Paintings he e.xecuted,
and the Prices he was paid for them.
Edited by William Cotton, Eaq.
8vo,
cloth.

Hs

(,!

1.,

•fthe Critlc.nl Journal, kcjit by Reynolds
rrnc:. and Venic«, will Lc cslcv;iucd by
tuosi.

—LtadtT.

V«

RIMBAULT (E. F., LL.l)., F.8.A., dr.)—A.
Jiittb; Book of Songs and llalliid.^^, gulher-
i'A from Ancient Music Book.-*, MS. and
lUrganlbj itfiflSsHii^ in poaL ttvo,
Printr<l.
1>I». 2i;3, ///. morocco.

4l^

20

Books on Sale at BniWs^ 36, Solio Square, London,

—

—

RIMEAULT (DR. E. F.) Bibliotheca Ma-
drigaliana.—A Bibliographical Account
oitlie Musical and Poetical Works jiub-
lislied in England during the Sixteenth
and Seventeenth Centuries, under the Ti-
tles of Madrigals, Ballets, Ayres, Canzo-
nets, &c., &c.

8vo, cloih.

5s

It records a class of books left undescribed by Ames,
Herbert, and Dibdin, and furnisbes a most valuable
Catalogue of Lyrical Poetry of the age to which it re-
fers.

ROBERT'S (GEORGE, of Lyme-Rerjis)—
Life, Progresses, and Rebellion of James,
Duke of Monmouth, &c., to his Capture
and Execution, with a full account of the
"Bloody Assize," under Judge Jeffries,
and Copious Biographical Notices. 2 vols,
post 8vo, plates and cuts,
7s 6d
{original 2Jrice £1. 4s)

cloth.

Two very interesting volumes, particularly so to those
Quoted for

connected with the West of England.
facts by Lord Macaulay.

ROBERTS' (GEORGE) The

Social
History of the People of the Southern
Counties of England in Past Centuries,
illustrated in regard to
their Habits,
Municipal Bye-laws, Civil Progress, &c.
Thick 8vo, cloth.
7s 6d {original price
16s)

An interesting volume on old English manners and cus-
toms, mode of travelling, punishments, witchcrr^ft,
gipsies, pirates, stage-players, pilgrimages, prices of
labour and provisions, the clothing trade of the West
of England, &c., compiled chiefly from original ma-
terials, as the archives of Lyme-Regis. and Wey-
mouth, family papers, church registers, &c.
Dedica-
ted to Lord Macaulay.

ROBIN HOOD.—THE GREAT HERO
of the Ancient Minstrelsy of England,
" Robin Hood," his Period, Real Charac-
ter, &c., investigated and ascertained. By
Rev. Joseph Hunter. Post 8vo.
the
2s 6d

RUNIC MONUMENTS.—The Old
Northern Runic Monuments of Scandana-
via and England, now first collected and
deciphered by George Stephens, F.S.A.,
Professor of Engli^^h in the University of
Copenhagen.
Yolio,inany hundred engra-
bronze, and
vings, some in gold,
colours, pp. 1112, in two parts {the com-
plete work).

silver,

£5.

ACRED MUSIC.-BY THE REV.
W.Sloanc Evans, M.A. Royal 8vo,
Is 6d {original
third edition, sewed.
price 6s)

Consisting of Psalm Tunes, Sanctusscs, Kyrie-Elcisons,
&c., and fifty-four Single and Double Chants (Major,
Changeable, and Minor).

ST, CUTHBERT. -RAINES (Rev. Jas.)
Saint Cuthbert, with an Account of the
State in which his Remains were found
upon the Opening of his Tomb in Dur-

ham Cathedral,
icoodcuts,
10s 6d.

1827.

4to, plates and
vol).

Ids. {a very interesting
{original price £l. lis Cd)

SALOP.— The Roman City of Uriconium
at Wroxeter, Salop ; illustrative of the
History ' and Social Life
of our Ro-
mano-British Forefathers. By J. Corbet
Anderson. A handsome volume, post Svo,
with nuraerous cuts drawn on icoodfrom. the
actual objects by the author, extra cloth. 83

SALVERTE'S (EUSEBIUS) History
of the Names of Men, Nations, and Pla-
ces, in their Connection with the Pro-
Translated by the
gress of Civilization.
Rev. L. H. Mordaque, M.A., Oxon. 2 vols,
8vo, cloth.

£1. 4s

"Notre nom propre c'est nous-memes."
" Nomina si nescis periit cognitio rcrum."

"Full of learning, well written, and well translated."—

Daily News.

" These two volumes are filled with a minute and philo-
sophical enquiry into the origin of names of all sorts,
among all nations, and show profound scholarship and
patient skill in wide and elaborate research. Much of
the work is necessarily too profound for general rea-
ders—particularly the appendices to the second vol-
ume—but the larger part of the enquiry is so curious
and interesting that any ordinary reader will appreci-
ate and profit by the researches."
Birmingham
Jounial.

SANDYS' (W., i^.^.^l.) — Christmastide,

History,

Festivities,

Carols
its
In a handsome vol.
{with their music).
8vo, illustrated with 20 engravings after
the desings ofF. Stephanoff, extra cloth, gilt
edges.

5s {original price 14s)

and

"Its title vouches that Chrisi}}tastidc is germane to the
time. Mr. Sandys has brought together, in an octavo
of some 300 pages, a great deal of often interesting
information beyond the stale gossip about ' Christmas
in the olden time, "and the threadbare make-believes of
jollity and geniality which furnish forth most books on
the subject. His carols, too, which include some in old
French and Provencal, are selected from numerous
sources, ar.d comprise many of the less known and
His materials are presented
more worth knowing.
with good feeling and mastery of his theme. On tho
whole the volume deserves, and should anticipate a
welcome."

Spectator.

SANDYS' (W.) and S. A. FORSTER.—
History of the Violin and other Instru-
ments played on with a Bow, from the
Earliest Times to the Present, also an
Account of the Principal Makers, En-
glish and Foreign.
Thick 8vo, pp. 403,
with many engravings^ cloth.

14s

collected,

SANDYS' (GEORGE) Poetical Works,
now first
with Introduction
and Notes by the Rev. Richard Hooper,
]\I.A., Eilitor of Cha]mian's Homer, with
]\lusic to the Psalms, by Henry
the
Lawes, revised by Dr. E. F. Rimbault.
2 vols, fcap. Svo, imrtrait, cloth.

10s

Large PArcR, 2 vols, post Svo, cloth

153

—

—

—

—

—

Boohs 0)1 Sale at Smith's, 36, SoJio Square, London.

—

21

S A IT L L (W. D.) On the Connection
between Astronomical and Geolocrical
Plieonomena, addressed to the Geologists
of Europe and America.
8v0j diagrams,

seiL'ed..

23

SCOTT (HENRY, Minister

of Anstruther
Fasti- Ecclesice Scoticance ; the
Wester).
Succession of Ministers to the Parish
Churches of Scotland, from the Eeforma-
tion, A.D. 1560, to the Present Time. 4to,
Parts I to VI (each containing about 400
pages) £1. 10s each.

The design of the present work is to present a com-
prehensive account of the Succession of Ministers
of the Church of Scotland, since the period of the
Reformation. An attempt is made to give some ad-
ditional interest by furnishing incidental notices of
their lives, writings, and families, which may prove
useful to the Biographer, the Genealogist, and the
A similar work to " Wood's Athenae
Historian.
Oxoniensis."

SCBASE FAMILY.—Genealogical Me-
of
Is 6d

moir of the
of
Sussex. By M. A. Lower.

Family

Scrase,

8vo.

SELDEN'S (JOHN)

Table Talk, with
a Biographical Preface and Notes by
S. ^Y. Singer.
Third edition, fop. 8vo,
portrait, cloth.

—^ Large paper. Post 8vo, cloth.

5b

7s 6d
Nothing can be more interesting than this little book,
containing a lively picture of the opinions and con-
versations of one of the most eminent scholars and
most distinguished patriots England has produced.
There are few volumes of its size so pregnant with
sense, combined with the most profound learning ; it
is impossible to open it without finding some impor-
tant fact or discussion, something practically useful
and applicable to the business of life.
Coleridge
says, ' There is more weighty bullion sense in this
book than I ever found in the same number of pages
in any uninspired writer.'
Its merits
had not escaped the notice of Dr. Johnson, though in
politics opposed to much it inculcates, for in reply to
an observation of Boswell, in praise of the French
Ana, he said, ' A few of them are good, but we have
one book of the kind better than any of them— Sel-
dcn's Table Talk. '

Mr. Singer's Preface,

"

A LIFE of

SHAKESPERIANA.

Shakespeare, including many
particulars respecting the Poet and his
Family, never before published. By J,
O. Halliwell, F.R.S., etc.
8vo, iilnS'
trated with 75 engravings on wood, most
of which are of neia objects, from draw-
1848
ings by Fairholt, cloth.
This work contains upwards of forty documents respect-
ing Shakespeare and his family, ntmcr hr/orcpublished,
besides numerous
illustrating
All the anecdotes and traditions
the Poet's biography.
concerning .Shakespeare arc here, for the first time,
collected, and much new light is thrown on his
personal history, by papers exhibiting him as selling
(Jf the seventy-six engravings
Malt, .Stone, &c.
which illustrate the volume, vtorc than fifty have
never before l)een eng;raved.

indirectly

others,

15.s.

It is the only life of Shakespeare to be bought separately

from his works.

NEW Illu.strations of the Life, Studies, and
Writings of Shakespfare. By tlie K(;v.
Jo.«iEPii IIcNTER,
2 vols,
cloih.
7h 6d {original yrice, £i. is).
1845
Sui'plcmcntary to all editions of tli': works of the Poet.

8vo,

^

SHAKESPEARE'S Versification, and its Ap-
parent Irregularities Explained by Exam-
ples from Early and Late English Writer?,
By W. Sidney Walker. Edited by Wm.
Nansom Lettsom. Fcp. 8vo, cloth. 6s 1854
" The reader of Shakespeare would do well to make
himself acquainted with this excellent little book pre*
vious to entering upon the study of the poet."
Mr.
Singer, in the Prefaee to his New Edition of Shake-
speare.
A CBITICAL Examination of the Text
of Shakespeare ; together with Notes on
his Plays and Poems, by the late W.
Sidney Walker. Edited by W. Nansou
Lettsom.
3 vols, foolscap 8vo, cloth,
1860
18s.
ourselves differing from Mr.
Walker on readings and interpretations, but we sel-
dom differ from him without respect for his scholar-
ship and care.
His are not the wild guesses at truth
which neither gods nor men have stomach to endure ;
but the suggestions of a trained intelligence and a
Future editors and commentators
chastened taste.
will be bound to consult these volumes, and consider
their suggestions. "
" A valuable addition to our Philological Literature,
the most valuable part being the remarks on contem-
porary literature, the mass of learning by which the
exact meaning and condition of a word is sought to be
established."

"Very often we find

A thettannt.

Literary Gazette.

" Mr. Walker's Works undoubtedly form altogether
the most valuable body of verbal criticism that has
Mr, Dyce's Pre-
yet appeared from an individual."
face to Vol. I. ofhis Shakespeare, 1864.
NARES (Archd.) Glossary, or Collection of
AVords, Phrases, Customs, Proverbs, etc.,
illustrating the Works of English Au-
thors, particularly Shakespeare and his
Contemporaries. A new edition, with
Considerable Additions both of Words
and Examples. By James O. Halliwell,
F.R.S., and Thomas Wright, M.A., F.S. A.
1867
2 thick vols, cloth.

£1. Is.

Other "Shakesf>eriana" 7uill be found at p. 27.

WORKS BY SAMUEL SHARPE.

Author of ths ^^ History of Ancient Eqypt," etc.
THE EGYPTIAN ANTIQUITIES in the
Post 8vo,

British Museum described.
ivith many woodcuts, cloth.
"Mr. Sharpc here presents the student'of Egyptian

5s

.

.

.

-

antiquity and art with a very useful book.
To the accomplished student this book will be useful
as a reminder of many things already known to him ;
to the tyro it may serve as a guide and aide-memoire ;
to the mere visitor to the Galleries in the British
Museum, this will be a handy guide book, in which
an immediate answer may he sought and founil for
the oft-repeated questions before these wondrous re-
mains—of what are their natures? what their mean-
ings? what their purposes?"
EGYPTIAN MYTHOLOGY and Egyptian
Christianity, with their Inlluence on the
Podt
Opinions of ^lodern Chri.stondom.
8vo, with 100 engravings, cloth.
38

Athenaeum.

EGYPTIAN Ilierogiyphics, being an attempt
to explain their Nature, Origin, and
Meaning, with a Vocabulary.
8vo, cluth.
lo.s 6d

HISTOllY of the Hebrew Nation and its
Second and

Post 8vo, cloth.

Lit(!rature.
E.NI.AlKiKD EDITION.

fls

The first edition has been transl.ilcd into Herman, but
it is not a proper reflex of the work : the translator
has made omission<« and alterations to suit \m vicwt.
Germans will please note this.

22

Boohs on Sale at Smith's, 36, Soho Square, London,

—

,

TESTAMENT (Old).—The Hebrew Scrip-
tures, translated Ly Samuel Sliarpe, beiiif^
a revision of tlie authorised Enirlisli Old
3 vols, leap. 8vo, doth, red
Testament.
7s 6d (A Second and Kevised Edi-
edges.
tion now ready).

TESTAMENT (The New) Translated from
By Samuel Sliarpe.
12mo, pp. 412, cloth.

Griesbach's Text,
12th thousand.
Is6d

Is 6d

CRITICAL NOTES on the Authorised Eng-
lish Version of the New Testament, being
a Companion to the Author's " New Tes-
tament translated from Griesbach's Text."
Fcap, 8vo, second edition^ cloth.

Fcap. 8vo, cloth.

ON THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE BIBLE.
TEXTS FROM THE HOLY BIBLE, ex-
plained by the help of Ancient Monu-
ments. By Samuel Sharpe.
With 166
by Joseph
drawings on wood,
BoNOMi, Curator of Soane's Museum. Post
8V0, SECOND EDITION ENLARGED, cloth.
33 6d

THE DECREE OF CANOPUS in Hierogly-
phics, and Greek, with Translations and
an Explanation of the Hieroglyphical
7s 6d
Characters.
This inscription or tablet was discovered in Egypt in
i86s, and is preserved in the Khedive's museum at
Cairo.

8vo, 16 plates, cloth.

2s 6d

chiefly

THE ROSETTA STONE (in

the British
Museum) in Hieroglyphics and Greek,
with Translations and an Explanation of
the Hieroglyphical Characters.
8vo, 8
plates, cloth.

4s

SHEPHERD'S (Charles) Historical Ac-
count of the Island of Saint Vincent, in
the West Indies, with large Appendix
on Population, Meteorology, Produce of
Estates, Revenue, Carib Grants, etc. 8vo,
plates, cloth.

3s (original price l^s)

SllffiS' (RICHARD, 0/ tU Dcpt. ofMSS. in the
British Museum) A Manual for the Genea-
logist, Tojiographcr, Antiquary, and Legal
Professor, consisting of Descrii)tions of
Public Records, Parochial and other Re-
gisters. AVills, County and Family His-
tories, Heraldic Collections in Public
8vo, second edition, pp.
Liljraiies, &c.
540, cloth.

15s

This work will be found indispensable by those engaged
in the study of Family History and Heraldry, .and by
the compiler of County and Local History, the Anti-
quary aud the Lawyer.

BINDING'S (PROFESSOR, of Copenhagen,)
History of Scandinavia, from, the early
times of the Northmen, the Senlvings, and
Vikings, to the present day.
First P]ng-
lish Edition, thorouglily revised and aug-
8vo, pp. 490, large map a)id
mented.
portrait of Q. Margaret, cloth.

Gs

SLOANE.—EVANS (W. S.) Grammar of I
British Heraldry, consisting of Blazoa
and Marshalling, with an Introduction on i
the Rise and Progress ©f Symbols and i
8vo, second edition, many
Ensigns.
plates, cloth.

5s (original price 13s)

j

SOMERSET.—The Medieval Nunneries ;
of the County of Somerset, and Diocese
of Bath and Wells, together mth the An- ]
nals of their Impropriated Benefices from
the earliest times to the death of Queen.
Mary. By Rev. Thomas Hugo, M. A., &c«
A handsome vol, imp, 8vOj with platc^ •
half morocco, neat.

£1. 63

SOMERSET. —History of Taunton Priory
By the Rev. Tnos. Hugo. Royal 8vo,
ptales, doth.

93

SOUTHWELL'S (ROBERT,

Canon

of
Loretto) Poetical Works, now first com-
pletely edited by W. B. TurnbuU. Fcap.
8vo, doth.
" His piety is simple and sincere—a spirit of unaffected
gentleness and kindliness pervades his poems—and he
is equally distinguished by weight of tliought and
sweetness of expression."

Saturday Kevie^v.,

4s

SPENCE (JOSEPH) Anecdotes and Cha-
racters .of Books and Men.
Collected
from the Conversation of iSli. Pope and
his Tim"
other eminent Persons of
With Notes, Life, etc., by,S. W. Singk
The second edition.
cloth.

Fcp. 8vo,porlraii,

Cs

Large paper, post Svo, cloth.

7s 6d
"The 'Anecdotes* of kind hearted Mr. Spcnce, the
friend of Pope, is one of the best books of ana in the
English language,"— Cr/'/jc".

SPROTT'S (THOMAS, a Monh of Canterlury^
circa 1280) Chronicle of Profane and ISa-
Translated from the ori-
cred History.
ginal MS., on 12 i^archment skins, in the
possession of Joseph Mayer, Esq., of Li-
verpool. By Dr. AV. Bell. 4to, Jmlf houi
moi'occo, accompanied with an exact fac^
mile of the entire Codex, 37 feet long, in
round case, PRIVATELY PRINTED, very ca-
rious,

£2. 2s

STAFFORDSHIRE.—TWAMLEY's (C.)
Historical and Descriptive Account of
Dudley Castle in Stiitfordshire. Post 8v(
folding pedigrees, cloth.

4s

STIRRY'S (Thos.) A Rot amongst th.e
Bishops, or a Terrible Tempest in the Sea
of Canterbury, set forth in lively em-
blems, to please the Judicious Header.
(A Satire on Abp. Laud), four^ very curiov
icoodcut emhlcms, cloth.

3s

A facsimile of the very rare origiaal edition, which sold

at Dindlcy's sale for £13.

Boohs on Sale at Smith's, 36, Soho Square, London,

—

—

23

STUART FAMILY.—TOWNEND'S (W.)
The Descendants of the Stuarts. An im-
chronicled Page in England's History.
8vo, portraits and folding pedigrees, second
EDITION, WITH ADDITIONS, half morocco,
6s {original price 10s 6d)

This volume contains a most minute, precise, and valua-
Neithe* of our
ble history of the Stuart Family.
Historians from Hume to Macaulay give even the
more prominent facts in connection with, many
branches of the House of Stuart,

SUFFOLK—Notes or Jottings about
Aldborongh, in Suffolk, relating to Mat-
ters Historical, Antiquarian, Ornithologi-
cal, and Entomological. By Nicholas
Penwick Hele, Surgeon there.
Post 8vo,
plates, cloth,

7s 6d

SUSSEX.—A Compendious History of
County of Sussex; Topographical, Ar-
By M. A.
chaeological, and Anecdotal.
Lower, author of ** Patronymica Bri-
tannica," '^ Curiosities of Heraldry," &c.
12s 6d {original vrice
2 vols, 8vo, cloth.
£h 5s)

SUSSEX. — The Churches of Sussex.
Etched by K. H. Nibbs, with Historical
and Archaeological descriptions by M. A.
Lower. 4to, 86 plates, half bd., top ^dge
gilt,

£1. lis 6d

SUSSEX.—LOWER'S (M. A.) Memorials
8vo,

of the Town of Seaford, Sussex.
plates.

3s 6d

SUSSEX.—LOWER'S (M. A) Bodiam (in
Sussex), and its Lords. 8vo, engravings. Is
SUSSEX—MANTELL (Dr. GIDEON) A
Day's Ramble in and About the Ancient
Town of Lewes, Sussex.
12nio, engra-
vings, cloth.

23

SUSSEX.—History and Antiquities of
the Town and Port of Rye. By W. IloL-
Thick 8vo, pp. 624, cloth {only
LOWAY.
IbO printed).

£1. Is

SUSSEX—TIERNEY'S (REV. CANON)
History and Antif^uities of the Castle and
Town of Arundel, including the Biogra-
phy of its Earls.
2 vols, royal 8vo, fine
plates, cloth,

14s {original price £% 10s)

SUSSEX.—Descriptive Catalogue of the
Original Charters, (Irauts, Donations, &c.,
constituting the Muniments of Battle
Abbey; also the Papers of the Montagus,
Sidneys, and Websters, embodying many
hi^bly interf'sting and valuable; Records
of ijands in Sussex, Kent, and Egsex, with
Preliminary Memoranda of the Abbey of
Jiattel, uud llintorical ParticularH of the
Abbots,

iivo, 2,'6^ pages, cl<)th.

Is 6d

SWISS ECCLESIOLOGY.—Histoire de
rArchitecture Sacree du quatrieme au
dixieme siecle dans les anciens eveches de
Geneve, Lausanne et Sion. Par J. D.
Blavignac, Architecte. One vol, 8vo, pp.
450, and 37 plates ; and a 4to atlas of 82
plates of Architecture, Sculpture, Frescoes,
Reliquaries, (&c., (&c.

£2. 10s

A very remarkable book, and worthy the notice of the

Architect, the Archaeologist, and the Artist.

TESTAMENT (OLD).—The He-
brew Scriptures, translated by
Samuel Sharpe, being a revision
of the authorised English Old Testa-
3 vols, fcp. 8vo, cloth, red edges.

ment.
7s 6d
' In the following Revision of the Authorised Version
of the Old Testament, the aim of the Translator has
been to shew in the Text, by greater exactness, those
peculiarities which others have been content to poini:
out in Notes and Commentaries. He has translated
from Van der Hooght's edition of the Hebrew Bible,
printed in Amstetdam in 1705 ; except when, in a few
cases, he has followed some of the various readings so
industriously collected by Dr. Kennicott."
Frejacg,

TESTAMENT (THE NEW) Translated
By Samuel
from Griesbach*s Text.
Sharpe, Author of the History of Egypt,
12mo, pp. 412, cloth.
&c.
Is 6d

5th edition.

The aim of the translator has been to give the meaning
and idiom of the Greek as far as possible in Eng-
lish words. The book is printed in paragraphs (the
verses of the authorised version are numbered in the
margins) the speeches by inverted commas, and the
quotations from the "Old Testament" in italics, those
passages which seem to be poetry in a smaller type.
It is ejttirelyfree from aity motive to enforce doctri-
Six large impressions of the volume
7tal joints.
sufficiently test its value.

We cordially recom.mend this edition of the New Testa-
British Con-,

ment to our readers and contributors.
troversialist.

Upon the whole, we must admit that this is the most
correct English Version in existence, either of the
whole or of any portion of the New Testament.— The
Ecclesiastic, and repeated by the English Church-
man,

THOMPSON'S (EBENEZER) A Vindi-
cation of the Hymn " Te Deuni Lauda-
mus," from the Corruptions of a Thou-
sand Years, with Ancient Versions in
Anglo-Saxon, High German, Norman-
French, &c., and an English Paraphrase
of the XVth Century, now first printed.
Fcap. 8vo, cXoth.

3s

A book well worth the notice of the Ecclesiastical Anti-

quary and the Philologist.

THOMPSON (EBENEZER) On the Ar-
chaic Mode of expressing Numbers in
Eu':^li8h, Anglo-Saxon, Fricsic, etc.
8vo,
((',,/'' ingenious and learned pamphlet, inte-
resting to the Philologist).

Is

TITIAN—Notices of the Life and Works
ol Titian the Painter. By Sir Auiiajiam
Hume. Koyul 8vo, portrait, cloth.

Ca

—

—

24:

Books on Sale at Sviith*Sy 36, So/w Square^ London,

TONSTALL (CUTHBERT, BUhop of Dur-
ham) Sermon preached on Palm Sunday,
1539, before Henry VIII. ; reprinted ver-
hatim from the rare edition hy Berthelet, in
1539.

12mo.

Is 6d

An exceedingly intcre.stiii.q: Sermon, at the commence-
ment of the Reformation : Strypc in his "Memorials,"
has made large extracts from it.

TORRENT OF PORTUGAL ; An Eng-
lish Metrical Romance. Now first pub-
lished, from an unique MS. of the XVth
Century, ])reserved in the Chetham Li-
Edited by J. 0.
brary at Manchester.
Halliwell, &c.

Post 8vo, cloth.

5s

" This is a valuable and interesting addition to our
list of early English metrical romances, and an indis-
pensable companion to the collections of Ritson,
Weber, and Ellis."

Literary Gazette.

TOPOGRAPHER (THE) AND GENEA-
Edited by J. G. Nichols, 3 vols,

logist.
8vo, doth.

£1. 5s (pub ^3. 33)

"This extremely valuable work forms a sequel to the
" Collectanea Topographica Genealogica," and the
intrinsic value and originality of the materials com-
Erised therein, will entitle it not only to preservation,

ut to frequent reference.

TRANSACTIONS OF THE LOGGER.
8vo, pp. 174, with
ville Literary Society.
many humorous cuts^ extra cloth, gilt edges.
7s 6d

A volume brim full of humour. It was printed for private

circulation.

TWO LEAVES OF KING WALDERE
and King Gudhere, a hitherto unknown
Old English Epic of the 8th Century be-
longing to the Saga Cycle of King Theo-
doric and his Men. Now first published
with a Modern English Reading, Notes,
and Glossary by George STErHENS, Eng-
lish Professor in the University of Copen-
Royal 8vo, with four Photographic
hagen.
Facsimiles of the MS. of the dth Century,
recently discovered at Copenhagen.
Without the Facsimiles.

7s 6d

15s

NITARIAN. — Outlines of Ser-
mons, taken chiefly from the Pub-
lished Works of Unitarian Writers.
8vo, cloth.

3s 6d

ADEMECUM FOR MALT-
WORMS; or a Guide to Good
Fellows, being a Description of the
Manners and Customs of the most
Eminent Publick Houses, in and about the
Cities of London and AVestminster, with
a hint on the Props (or Principal Custo-
mers) of each House.
{In verse) 8vo, pp.
104, cloth.

4s (id

Reprinted verbatim, with facsimiles of .ibout 190 highly
curious woodcuts of the London Tavern Signs of tlie
early part of the last century. Of the signs here men-
tioned, nearly 100 may still be found in the Metro-
polis. The only perfect copy known of this rare work,
which is highly curious as aii illusnalion of a certain

order of London Life a century and a half ago,
occurred in Mr. Tyrrell's Collection where it pro-
duced £/^2.
Mr. G. Daniell's copy, incomplete, sold
for £i(>.

VASEY (GEORGE) A Monograph of the
Genus Bos.— The Natural History of
Bulls, Bisons, and Buffaloes, exhibiting
all the known Species (with an Introduc-
tion containing an account of Experiments
on Rumination from the French of M.
Flourens).
8vo, with 72 engravings on
ivood hy the Author, cloth.
6s {original
price 10s 6d)

Written in a scientific and popular manner, and printed
and illustrated uniformly with the works of Bell, Yar-
Dedicated to the late Mr,
rell, Forbes, Johnston, &c.
Yarrcll, who took great interest in the progress of the
Mr. Vasey engraved many of the beautiful
work.
woodcuts in Mr. Yarrell's works.

VASEY'S (GEO.) Illustrations of Eating,
displaying the Omnivorous Character of
Man, and exhibiting the Natives of various
Countries at Feeding-time.
Fcap. 8vo,
with woodcuts "by the Author.

28

VICARS' (JOHN) England's Worthies,
under whom all the Civil and Bloody
Warres, since Anno 1642 to Anno 1647,
Royal 12mo, reprinted in the
are related.
old style {similar to Lady JVilloughhy's
Diary), ivith copies of the 18 rare portraits
after Hollar, etc., half morocco.

5a

•

ALES. — HALLIWELL (J. O.)
Family Excur.'^ions in
Notes of
North AVales, taken chiefly from
Bhyl, Abergele, Llandudno, and
Fcp. 4to, with engravings, ele-
5s

Bangor.
gantly printed hy WhittinghaMf cloth.

WALES. — Collections, Historical, and
relating to ^Montgomery-
Issued by tlie Powys-land Club.
£1. 5s—Vols 2,

Archaeological
shire.
Thick 8vo, plates, vol 1.
3, 4, 5.

^1. 10s each

WEBSTER'S (JOHN) Dramatic Works.
Edited with Notes, etc., by Wm. Hazlitt.
4 vols, fcp. 8vo, cloth.

£1.

Large paper, 4 vols, post 8vo, cloth.

£1. 103

This is the most complete edition, containing two more

plays than in Dyce's edition.

WESLEY.— Narrative of a Remarkable
Transaction in the Early Life of John
Wesley. Now first printed from a MS. in
the British Museum. Second Edition ;
to which is added a Review of the Work
by the late Rev. Joseph Hunter, F.S.A.
8vo, seiced.

2s

A very curious love affair between J- W. and his house-
it gives a curious insight into the early
It is entirely unknown

keeper ;
economy of the Methodists.
to all Wesley's biographers.

r Books on Sale at Smith's, 36, Soho Square, London.

—

—

—

S^EST (MRS.)—A Memoir of Mrs. John
West, of Cliettle, Dorset. By the Rev.
JonN West, A. M. A new edition, with
Brief Memoir of the Writer.
12mo, cloth.
2s 6d

The fourth edition of an interesting volume of Religious
Biography. The Rev. John West was the first mis-
sionary to the Indians of Prince Rupert's Land, the
first wooden church at Red River was partly built by
his own hands.

WILLIAMS (JOHN, Archdeacon of Cardigan)
Ethnological, and
Essays, Philological,
Archceological, connected with the Pre-
historical Records of the Civilised Nations
of Ancient EurojDe, especially of that Race
which first occupied Great Britain. Thick
8vo, with 7 ^plates, cloth.

16s

VILLMOTT (ROBERT ARIS, some time
Incumbent of Bear Wood, Berks) A Jour-
nal of Summer Time in
the Country.
Fourth Edition ; to which is added an
Introductory Memoir by his Sister.
Fcp.
8vo, elegantly printed by Whittingham, ex-
tra cloth.

5s

This 'Journal of Summer Time' is a genial gossip of lit-
erary matters under the various days of the month
from May to August.
It is full of anecdote, and full
of interest : and is a sort of literary natural history,
like that of Selboume, by good Gilbert White.

WILTSHIRE.—MATON'S (DR. W. G.)
Natural History of W^iltshire, as compre-
heniled within Ten Miles round Salisbury.
8vo.

Privately Printed.

2s

WILTSHIRE.—WAYLEN (JAMES, of
Devizes) Hi-story and Antiquities of the
Town of Marlborough, and more generally
of the entire Hundred of Selkley in Wilt-
shire.

Thick Svo, woodcuts, cloth.

14s

Tliisvolome describes a portion of Wilts not included

by Sir R. C. Hoare and other topographers.

CITHER'S

SoiigH of tlie Cliurch.
duction, by E^DWARD Farr.
Musical Notes,
Giljljons.
Hole, cloth.

(GEORGE) Hymns and
Edited witli Intro-
Also the
composed by Orlando
With portrait after
185G
** Mr. Fan* has added a very interesting biographical
introduction, and we hope to find that the public will
put their seal of approbation to the present edition of
an author who may fairly take his i)l.icc on the same
Gents. Mag. Oct. 185O.
shelf with George Herbert."

Fcp. Svo.

53

nTHER's (GEORGE) Hallelujah, or
liritiiin's Second Remembrancer, in Praisc-
ful and Penitential Hymri.s,
Spiritual
With Introduc-
Song.'<, and Moral Odes.
tion by Edward Faru.,
Fcp. Svo, por-
trait, cloth.

Ch

25
WORCESTERSHIRE. — The Heraldry
of Worcestershire, being a Roll of the
Arms (and in many cases the Genealogies)
borne by the Noble, Knightly, and Gentle
Families, who have had Property, or Re-
sidence, in that County, at various Periods
dowTi to the Present Time.
Collected
from the Heralds' Visitations, Ancient
Manuscripts, Church Monuments, Perso-
nal Seals, and other Authentic Sources.
By H. Sydney Grazebrook, Esq., of the
Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law, Author
of the " Heraldry of Smith," (Sec.
2 vols,
fcp. 4to, 800 pp.

£2. 2s

WRIGHT'S (THOMAS, M.A., F.S.A., Mem-
ber of the Institute of France) Essay on
Archaeological Subjects, and on various
Questions connected with the History of
Art, Science, and Literature in the Middle
2 vols, post Svo, printed by Whit-
Ages.
tingham, illustrated ivith 120 engravings,
cloth.

16s

"Mr. Wright is a man who thinks for himself, and one
who has evidently a title to do so.
Some of the
opinions published in these Essays are, he tells us,
the result of his own observations or reflections, and
are contrary to what have long been those of our own
antiquarians and historians."

" Two volumes exceedingly valuable and important to
all who are interested in the Archaeology of the Mid-
dle Ages ; no mere compilations, but replete with fine
reasoning, new theories, and useful information, put
in an intelligible manner on subjects that have been
hitherto but imperfectly understood."
Londoti Rev.

Spectator.

WRIGHT (THOMAS) Essays on the
Literature, Popular Superstitions, and
History of England in the Middle Ages.
2 vols, post Svo, elegantly printed, cloth.
IGs

Contents : Essay i. Anglo-Saxon Poetry.

7. Dr. Grimm's German Mythology.

2. Anglo
Norman Poetry. 3. Chansons de Geste, or Historical
Romances of the Middle Ages.
3. Proverbs and
Popular Sayings.
Anglo-Latin Poets of the
4.
6. Abelard and the Scholastic
Twelfth Century.
Philosophy.
8
National Fairy Mythology of England.
9. Popular
Superstitions of Modern Greece, and their connection
10. Friar Rush and the Frolic-
with the English.
some Elves.
II. Dunlop's History of Fiction.
12.
History and Transmission of Popular Stories.
13.
14. Adventures of Hereward the
Poetry of History.
16. His-
Saxon.
tory of Fulke I'"it7.warine.
17. I'opular Cycle, or
Robin Hood IJallads.
18. Con(|uest of Ireland by the
19. Old English Poetical Songs.
Anglo-Normans.
20.

Story of Eustace the Monk.

Dunbar, the Scottish Poet.

15.

WRIGHT (THOMAS) Biographia Brit-

taiiica Litcraria, or Liugraphy of
Lit-'
ciary Cluiractera of Greiit liritain and Ire-
laud. Anglo-Saxon and ANObo-Noii-
MAN Peuiods,
2 thick vols, 8vo, cloth.
1 2s (original price £ 1 4s)

The Anclo-Nouman Pkiuod.
6s {original price 12s)

8vi), cloth.

Thick

Hitherto this intcrcslinpf volume has only been known
So
to the public by extracts in various puljlications.
few opics of the f)ri^in.i! arc known to exist, th.it ihc
copy from which this reprint tuis lM:eti taken cost 21
guineas.

Published under the supcritilcndencc o! ;he Council of

the Roy.il Society of Liler.ilnrc.

Tii'.Te is u') work in the Env^lish I-:iiUTinKe whii h Rives
th'.- re.i'ler surh .a coniprrhiMisivi; .uid connected His-
tory of the Literature of these periods.

—

—
—

26

Books on Bah at Sniiih\s, 36, Boho SqWiTc, London.

WRIGHT'S (THOMAS) Saint Patrick's
rick's Piir^^atovy, an Essay on the Le^*en(.ls
(li'llcll, Purgatory, and Pararlisp, current
dui*ing the Middle Ages.
I^ost8vo, cloth.
Cs

"A complete history of the legends and superstitions
relating to the subject, from the earliest times, rescued
from old MSS. as well as from old printed books.
It
embraces a singular chapterof literary history omitted
by Warton, and all former writers with wlioin we arc
acquainted : and we think we may add, tliat it forms
the best introduction to Dante that has yet been pub-
lished."

Literary Gazette.

"This appears to be a curious and even amusing book
on the singular subject of Purgatory, jn which the idle
and fearful dreams of superstition are shown to be
first narrated as tales, and then applied as means of
deducing the moral character of the age in which they
prevailed."

Spectator.

YORKSHIRE.—THE HISTORY of the
Township of Meltham,near lludderslicld.
By the late Rev. Joseph IIughes.
Edi-
ted with addition by C. II.
Post 8vo,
doth.

7s 6d

YORKSHIRE.—RAINES (REV. JAS.),
Cattcrick Church, Yorkshire, a correct
copy of the contract for its Iniilding in
Illustrated with Remarks and
1412.
With 13 flcdcs of views, elevations
Notes.
and details, by A. Salvin, Architect.
4to,
cloth.

Large Paper, cloth,

9s

63.

YORKSHIRE.—DAVIES (ROBT., F.S.A
Town Clerk of York) Extracts from the
Municipal Records of the City of York
during the Reign of Edward IV., Edward
v., and,Richard III., with Notes illustra-
tive and explanatory, and an Appendix,
containing some account of the Celebra-
tion of the Corpus Christi Festival at
York, in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Cen-
turies. 8vo, cloth. 4s {original price 10s 6d)

YORKSHIRE.—DAVIES (ROBT.) THE
Fawkes's of York in the IGth Century, in-
cluding Notices of Guy Fawkes, the Gun-
powder Plot Conspirator.
8vo.
Is6d

Post

YORKSHIRE.—THE HISTORY AND
Topography -of Harrogate and the Forest
of Knaresborough. By W. Graingc.
8vo,
521 pp., onap and illustrations,
10s Cd

cloth.

YORKSHIRE—SURTEES(REV. SCOTT
F., of Sprothurgh, Yorkshire) Waifs and
Strays of Nortli Ilumbcr History.
Post
8vo, 3 plates, cloth.

3a 6d

YORKSHIRE—HISTORY AND ANTI-
quities of the Parish of Blylh in the Comi-
ties of Notts and Yorkshire. By the Rev.
John Raine, Vicar. 4to, plates aiul pcdi'
greeSf cloth.

15s (original 2>^'ice £1. Cs)

PUBLICATIONS OF THE CAXTOI.

SOCIETY.

OF CHRONICLES AND OTHER WRITINGS
ILLUSTRATIVE OP THE HISTORY AND

MISCELLANEOUS

IjITERATURE OF

THE MIDDLE AGES.

Uniforinly printed in8vo, with English Prefaces

and Notes.

Of several of the Volumes only

100 copies have been printed.

5s 6d

CHRONICON Henrici de Silgrave.

No^^
first printed from the Cotton MS. By C
Hook.

GATMAR (Geoffrey) Anglo-Norman Mctricd
Chronicle of the Anglo-Saxon Kings.
Printed for the first time entire, with Ap-
pendix, containing the Lay of Havelok
the Dane, the Legend of Ernulph, ana
Life of Ilereward the Saxon.
Edited by
T. Wright, Esq., F.S.A.
Pp. 284 (only
to be had in a set)

^

The only complete edition ; that in the Monnmenta His-
torici Iiritannica, printed by thcRecord Commission,
is incnmplete.
LA REVOLTE du Comte de Warwick centre
le Roi Edouard IV., now first printed from
a MS. at Ghent, to which is added a
French
Grey and Queen ^lary, from a MS. at
Bruges.

letter, concerning Lady JaneSS

Edited by Dr. Giles.

3s 6d

"WALTERI Abbatis Dervensis Epistolcc, now
first printed from a MS. in St. Jolm's Col-
lege, Cambridge. By C. Messiter.4s 6il
BENEDICTI Abbatis Petriburgensis de Vitn
et Miraculis St. Thomae Cantaur, now
first printed from MSS. at Paris and Lam-
beth. By Dr. Giles.

GALFRIDI le Baker de Swinbroke, Chron*.
con Anglia) temp. Edward II. et III..
now first printed. By Dr. Giles.

10s

10s

1

EPISTOLA Herberti de Losinga, primi Epis-
copi Norwicensis, et Oberti de Clara, et
Elmeri Prioris Cantuariensis, now firsIRA
printed. By Col. Anstruther.

8s

|

ANECDOTA Bedco Lanfranci,

Tracts,

(inedited
by Bede, Lanfranc Tatwin, etc.)
Giles.

lOs

et aliorum*
Letters, Poems, &c.
By Dr.

RADULPTII Nigri Chronica Duo, now first

printed from MSS. in tlie British Museuni^-
P)V Lieut. Col. Anstruthur. 8s

MEMORIAL of Bishop AVaynlh^te, Fomidei
of St. Mary Magdalene College, Oxford
By Dr. Peter IIeylyn. Now first edited
from tne original MS. By J. R. Bloxam.|I;
D.D., Fellow of tlie same College.

5s Cd
ROBERT (4R0SSETETE (Bishop of Lincoln
" Chasteau d'Amour," to which is added
**La Vie de Sainto Marie Egyptienne.
and an English Version (of the 13th Cen
turv) of the " Cliasteau d' Amour," no\i
first edited. By U. CoOKE.

6s 6d

QALFREDI Monumentis Historia Britonnm
nunc primum in Anglis novem codd. MSS
collatis.

Editit J, A. Giles,

lOs

—

—

Books on Sale at Smith's, 36, Solm Square, London.

Is

27
ACCOUNT of the only known Manuscript
of Shakespeare's Plays, comprising some
inportant variations and corrections
in
" Merry Wives of AVindsor,"
the
ob-
tained from a Playhouse Copy of that Play
recently discovered. By J. O. Halliwell.
1843
8vo.
* WHO was Jack Wilson,' the Singer of Shake-
speare's Stage?" An Attempt to prove the
identity of this person vv'ithJohn Wilson,
Doctor of Music in the University of
By E. F. Rimbault,
Oxford, A.D. 1644,
LL.D.
1846
HAMLET.—An Attempt to ascertain whether
the Queen were an Accessory before the
Fact, in the Murder of her First Hus-
band.
1856
"This pamphlet well deserves the perusal of every

8vo, sewed.

8vo.

2s

Is

LANI Prioris Cantuariensis postea AlbTjatis
extant.

qiioe

Tewkesberiensis,
Edita J. A. Giles.

Scripta
6s 6d

SRONICOiSr Aiigliro retriburgcnsc, iteriiiu
post Sparkium cum cod. MSS. contulit.
J. A. Giles.

6s 6d

ITA Quorandum Anglo-Saxonum, Original
Lives of Anglo-Saxons and others who
lived before the .Conquest {in Latin).
Edited by Dr. Giles.

10s

10s

^BJPTORES Rerum Gestarum Wilhelmi
In Unum collecti. Ab J.

Concjuestoris.
A. Giles.
CoXTixENS:— I. Brevis rclatio de Willelmo nobilissimo
Comite Normannorum.
2. Protestatio Willclrai pri-
3. Widonis
mi de primatu Cantuariensis Ecclesia;.
Ambrianensis Carmen de Hastingensi.
4. Charta
5. Epistola Will, conquestoris ad
Willelmi Bastardi.
Gregorium papam. 6. Excerpta de vita Willelmi
8. Hymnus
Conquestoris.
de Morte Will. Conq.
10.
Gesta Will. DucisNormannorum. 11. Excerptum ex
12. Annalis Historia brevis
cantatorio S. Huberti.
sive Chronica Monasterii S. Stephani Cadomensis.
13. Carmen de Morte Lanfranci.
14. Charta a rege
15. Du Roi
Will, concessa Anglo Saxonice scripta.
Guillaume d'Angleterre par Chretien de Troyes.
16.
Le Dit de Gillaumc d'Angleterre.

9. De Morte Lanfranci.

7. De Morte Will Conq.

I

SHAKESPEARIANA.

Post 8vo, cloth.

3RTIGERN, an Historical Play,

3SAY on the Genius of Shakespeare, with
Critical Reraarks on the Characters of
Romeo, Hamlet, Juliet, and Ophelia, by
H. M. Graves.
2s 6d
1826
(original price 5s 6d)
repre-
sented at Drury Lane, April 2, 1796, as
a supposed newly discovered Drama of
Sliakcspeare, by William Henry Ire-
Nevj Edition, vnth an original
land.
Is 6d {original
d>vo, facsimile.
Preface.
1832
price 3s 6d)
The Preface is both interesting and curious, from the
additional information it gives respecting the Shake-
speare Forgeries, containing also the substance of the
author's "Confessions."

Is

collected in Warwickshire in 1603.
HfMed.

.lADITIONARY Anecdotes of Shakespeare,
8vo,
LS38
3SEliVATI0NS on an Auto.qraph of Sliakc-
speare, and the Ort]iri;:rvaphy of his Name,
by Sir Fred. Madden. 8vo, seioed.
Is
1831
lAKESPEARE'S Autobiographical Poems,
being his Sonnets clearly developed, with
his Character, drawn chiefly from his
Works, by C. A. Brown.
Post 8vo, cloth,
4^ 6d
1838
the
Early Editions of Shakespeare's Plays,
and of the Commentaries antl other Pub-
liciitions illustrative of his works. By J.
(). n
18H
f,L.
. everybody who wi".hcs to cirry on
. connected witli Shal.'Spcare, or wlio

lAKKSPERIANA, a Catalogue of

8vo, cloth.

3s

In

I

' fancy for Shakespeare llihliograpby."

CASON'S for a New Edition of Shakespeare's

Works, by J. Payne Collier.

8vo. Is

1812

student of Hamlet."

Notes and Queries.

PERICLES, Prince of Tyre, a Novel, by Geo.
Wilkins, printed in 1608, and founded
upon Shakespeare's Play, edited by Pro-
fessor MoMMSEN, with Preface and Ac-
count of some original Shakespeare edi-
tions extant in Germany and Switzerland,
and an Introduction by J, P. Collier.
1857
8vo, se^md.
LLOYD (W. Watkiss) Essays on Life and
Plays of Shakespeare contributed to the
Edition by S. W. Singer, 1856.
Thick
post 8vo, half calf gilt, marbled edges.
9s
1858

5s

Only 50 copies privately printed.

THE Sonnets of Shakespeare, rearranged and
divided into Four Parts, with an Intro-
duction and Explanatory Notes. By Dr.
1859
Robt. Cartwright. Post 8vo, 2s 6d
THE Shakespeare Fabrications, or the MS.
Notes of the Perkins folio, shown to be
of recent origin ; with Appendix on the
Authorship of the Ireland Forgeries, by
C. MA.NSFIELD Ingleby, LL.D.
Fcp.
8vo, ivith a facsimile shewing the pseudo
old writing and the pencilled words, cloth.
1859
STRICTURES on Mr. Collier's Now Edi-
tion of Shakespeare, published in 1858,
by the Rev Alexander Dyce.
8vo,
1859
cloth.
STRICTURES on Mr. Hamilton's Inquiry
into the Genuineness of the MS. Correc-
tions in J. Payne Collier's Annotated
By Souu-
Shakespeare.
1860
TATOR.
SHAKESPEARE and the Bible, showing how
much the great Dramatist was indc^bU'd
to Holy Writ for his profound knowledge
of Human Nnture. By the Rev. T. 11.
Eaton.
1860
By C.
1846
CROKl*:il (Crofton).—llemarkfl on an Article
inserted in th(! Papers of the Shakespeare
1849
Society.

CRTTKJISM applied to Shakespeare.

6ii (original price 7s Gd)

Sniull bvo, sewed,

Vc]^.Hvo, cloth.

Folio, 1632,

Badham.

Svo, sevml.

Poet 8vo.

2s 6(1

Is.

Is

la

28

BooTcs on Sale at Smith's, 36, Soho Square, London.

1

Is

Is

Is

Is

5s

tions.

8vo.

8vo.

3s 6d

8vo, cloth.

8vo, woodcuts.

Morris Barnett.

THE Grimaldi

THE Footsteps of Shakespeare, or a Kamble
•with the Early Dramatists, containing
New and Interesting Information respec-
ting Shakespeare, Lyly, Marlowe, Greene,
and others. By Dr. Kobt. Cartwrigiit.
Post 8vo.
18G1
THE TEMPEST as a Lyrical Drama. By
1850
A FEW Remarks on the Emendation, '' Who
Smothers her with Painting," in the Play
of Cymbeline, discovered JDy Mr. Collier,
in a Corrected Copy of the Second Edition
of Shakespeare. By J. O. IIalliwell,
1852
&c.
A FEW Notes on Shakespeare, with Occasi-
onal Remarks on the Emendations of the
Manuscript-Corrector in Mr. Collier's copy
of the folio, 1682, by the Rev. Alexan-
der Dyce.
1853
A FEW Words in Reply to the Rev. A.
Dyce's " Few Notes on Shakespeare." By
the Rev. Joseph Hunter. 8vo.
Is 1853
Shakespeare.—Notes and
Emendations on the Plays of Shakes-
peare, from a recently discovered annota-
ted copy by the late Joe Grimaldi, Esq.,
Comedian.
1853
A humorous squib on Collier's Shakespeare Emenda-
THE Moor of Venice, Cinthio's Tale, and
Shakespeare's Tragedy. By John Ed-
ward Taylor.
1855
CURSORY Notes on Various Passages in the
Text of Beaumont and Fletcher, as edited
by the Rev. Alexander Dyce, and on his
"Few Notes on Shakespeare." By the
Rev. John Mitford.
2s 6d
1856
BACON and Shakespeare, an Inquiry toucli-
ing Players, Playhouses, and Play-writers,
in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth ; to which
is appended an Abstract of a Manuscri]it
Autobiography of Tobie Matthews. By^V'.
2s 6d 1857
H. Smith. Fcp. 8vo, cloth.
SHAKESPEARE'S Coriolanus. Editel, with
Notes and Preface. By F. A. Leo, with
a quarto facsimile of the Tragedy of Cor-
iolanus, from the folio of 1623, photolitho-
graphed by A. Burchard, and with Ex-
tracts from North's Plutarch.
4to, elc-
1864
15s
fjantly printed, extra cloth.
Dramatic
versus Wit-Combats.—Auxiliary Forces
—Beaumont
Mars ton,
Decker, Chapman, and Webster.
Post
1864
Svo,
REPRINTS of Scarce Pieces of Shakespearian
Criticism, No 1, " Remarks on Hamlet,
1844
1736."
THREE Notelets on Shakespeare.— I. Shake-
peare in Germany ; II. The Folk-lore of
AVas Shakespeare a
Shakespeare ;
Soldier ? By William J. TuoMS, F.S.A.
1865
Post 8vo, cloth.

SHAKESPEARE and Jonson.

and Fletclier,

8vo, sewed.

Fcp. Svo.

Post 8vo.

4s 6d

Is 6d

III.

3s

1&(.

Is 6d

Svo, sewed.

SHAKESPEARE'S Editors and Commentr
tors. By the Rev. W. R. Arrowsmiti
Incumbent of Old St. Pancras.
8\
sewed.

NEW Readings in Shakespeare, or Propose
Emendations of the Text. By Robeil
Cartwright, M.D.
Is 6d
126(
THE SHAKESPEARE EXPOSITOR : being
Notes and Emendations on his Worki
By Thomas Keightley.
Thick fcp
8vo, cloth.
ISC',

SHAKESPEARE'S Jest Book.—A Hundred
Mery Talys, from the only perfect cop}
known.
Edited, with Introduction amj
Notes, by Dr. Herman Oesterley. Fed
Svo, nicely printed by JFhittingham, hall
morocco.

7s 6d

4s 6d

The only perfect copy known of the "Hundred Mer
I'alys" was lately discovered in the Royal Library a
This is a verbatim reprint, supplying a
Gotiengen.
the chasms and lost tales in former editions, with cc
pious Notes by the editor,; pointing out the origin (
the various tales, and authors who have used them
A DICTIONARY of the LANGUAGE

SHAKESPEARE. By Swyfen Jervk
4to, 37
of Darlaston Hall, Staffordshire.
pp., in donhle columns, 4to, cloth {a cliea
186
volume.)
The author died while the volume was in the pres
wiien his friend the Rev. Alex. Dyce, the Shakspeai
an scholar, completed it from tlic materials he ha
left.

12s

15s

cloth.

THE

Life and Works

4to, only bO j^rinted, cloth.

HALLIWELL's (J. 0.) Selected Notes upo
Shakespeare's Ti-agedy of Anthony an
Small 4to, only 50 printer
Cleopatra.
18e
15s
Selected Notes on the Tempest. Sma
186
CATALOGUE of the Books, Manuscript
AVurks of Art, Antiquities and Relics i
lustrative of tlie
Shakespeare, and of the History of Stra
ford-on-Avon, which are preserved
Shakespeare Birth-place, in Henley Strec
7s 6d
Svo, not printed for sale, cloth.
18(
SONNETS OF SHAKESPEAR
SOLVED, and the Mystery of his Frien-
ship, Love, and Rivalry Revealed, illul
trated by numerous Extracts from tl
Poet's Works, Contemporary Writers, aij
other Authors. By Henry Broun.
8\l
18 :
218 j.ages, cloth.
SHAKESPEARE'S SONNETS, and a Love I
Complaint, reprinted in the Orthograpll
and Punctuation of the Original Editi;
of 16(H), 3s 6d
18
THE Rural Life of Shakespeare, as illustrat,
by his AVorks. By C. Roach Smit
18
Svo, sewed.
SIIAKESPEREAN FLY-LEAVES and J
tings. By H. T. Hall. An enlarged e(j
tion.

Post Svo, cloth.

7s 6d

5s

2s

pr

Ih 2 vols, foolscap quarto, ^00 pages, clotk.

Price £2 2s\

THE

?^eraltrrg of OTorrestersj^tre;

BEING

A ROLL OF THE ARMS

(AND IN MANY CASES THE GENEALOGIES)

OF THE SEVERAL

NOBLE, KNIGHTLY, AND GENTLE FAMILIES,

OF THAT COUNTY, FROM THE EARLIEST PERIOD TO THE PRESENT TIME.

COLLECTED FROM THE HERALDS' VISITATIONS, ANCIENT

MANUSCRIPTS, CHURCH MONUMENTS, PERSONAL SEALS,

AND OTHER TRUSTWORTHY SOURCES.

BY

H. SYDNEY GRAZEBROOK, Esa,,

Of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law, Author of the " The Heraldry

of Smith,'''' dr'c., <5^c., dr'r.

HIS work contains an Alphabet of tlie Arms of nearly 2000 of the past
and present families of "Worcestershire, accompanied in many cases by
carefully compiled genealogical memoirs.

The information has been collected from the most trustworthy sources both in
print and manuscript, more especially from the several original Visitation Books of
the County preserved in the College of Anns, Dr. Prattinton's Worcestershire Col-
lections at the Society of Antiquaries, Nash's " History of Worcestershire," a MS.
Amorial of the county of the 17th century in the writer's own possession, and nu-
merous genealogical and heraldic MSS. in the public libraries andi n private hands.
Much important information has also Ijecn obtained from deeds, wills, parish
registers, church monuments, seals, and from pedigrees and other documents con-
tributed by the resident gentry.

London : JOHN RUSSELL SMITH, 36, Soho Square.

-

SPECIMEN OF THE WORK

483

THE HERALDRY OF WORCESTERSHIRE,

county.''''

John Russell, Knight, was master of the horse

to

Richard

II. ;

he married Agnes

de la Planche

or

Flanges, an heiress, and had issue a son, William Russell

of Strensham, who, by his
daughter and co-heiress of Thomas PTodington
mother, Agnes, was a daughter and co-heiress of Thomas

marriage

Agnes,

(whose

with

the

Cassey and Cecilia Cookseyf) acquired Witley and other

Cookseys.

estates of the

In the year 1627, William
He acted
a conspicuous part in support of the Royal cause, and

Russell of Strensham was created a baronet.

devoted a considerable portion of his estate to the service

of the King ;
yet, notwithstanding that diminution, his
estate was valued at ;^ 3,000 a year when the order of the
Royal Oak was projected.

Sir William died in 696,

and was succeeded by his son, Sir Francis, on whose

death without male issue, in 1 705, the title became extinct.

Sir

Francis

left

three

daughters,

Anne,

Mary,

and

Elizabeth,

his

estates

were

equally

between ^hom
Anne was thrice

divided.
1 734-5 ; Mary was married to Thomas Jones of Shrew
bury, and also died j.p., before 1729; and Elizabeth, wl
had the manor and estate of Strensham, espoused Willian

married, but

died

j.^.,

in

Dansey of Brinsop,
mother of an only daughter and heiress, Katherine, m

Hereford, by whom she

co.

was

to John Ravenhill.

child
ried
Frances, was married first to th'; Rev. Richard Nash, Da
(who took the name of Russell before Nash), and secondl

Ravenhill's

Mrs.

only

to Sir Charles Trubshaw Withers, knt., but had no issue

* Wiffcn's Mcnuiii.s oj iJic House of Riissill^ vol.
t ^Vt,' CouKyEV, and IIUDINGTUN.

i..

[). y/.

Just ptiblislicd, i7i foolscap quarto, elegantly printed in antique type
by Whittingham and Wilkins, with mtmerotis illustrations.
Price \^s. cloth.

Cije

l^craltrg

of

<^mit!).

BEING

A COLLECTION OF THE ARMS BORNE BY, OR ATTRIBUTED

TO, MOST FAMILIES OF THAT SURNAME IN

GREAT BRITAIN, IRELAND,'

AND GERMANY.

compiled from the harleian mss. and other .

authentic sources,

By H. SY^EY GRAZEBROOK, Esq.

HE above work contains

a correct

heraldic

descrip-

tion of the armorial Insignia of nearly every known

arnilgerous family of the surname of Smithy Smyth,

&c. (about 250 In number), and Is illustrated with 32 plates,

comprising 125 shields of arms copied In facsimile from a

curious MS.

In

the

Harleian

Collection

at

the

British

Museum.

*^* Tivcnly-five copies are issued with coloured illustrations, price

£2 2s., for which early application is necessary.

LONDON:

JOHN RUSSKLl. S ml Til,

36, SOI 10 sou ARE.

opinions of the Press' on ^' The Heraldry of Smith,"

^>

^^^^ ^^^ " ^^^^ ^^^^ Gazette."

^ n S 1
:gant little book is entitled to a place among the curiosities of literature
From MSS. and monumental authorities Mr. Grazebrook has collected a vast
number of coats of arms borne by various families of Smithy Smyth^ Smythc, and
Smijth^ and in so happy a manner has he executed his task that it is not without
interest for others, besides the prolific sept to which it is primarily addressed.
Mr. Grazebrook introduces into his volume a great deal of curious lore, and some
of his notes arc of historic value. We may add, that the printing and illustrations
of the volume are worthy of special commendation."

From " Notes and Queries."

" Many years ago, Mr. Nicholas Carlisle published a volume of Collections for a
History of the Ancient Family of Carlisle^ which drew from the learned editor of
the Monuniinta Historica Britannica the bitter remark— ' How lucky the man's
name was not Smith !'
It is needless to speculate upon what a history of the
Smiths would have been from the pen of the then Secretary of the vSocicty
Mr. Grazebrook, a learned and practised genealogist, shrinks
of Antiquaries.
from the task ; and in the volume before us confines himself to the armorial
bearings of some 250 of this surname, the majority of which are derived frf>m
two curious Harleian MSS. in the British Museum. In a pleasantly written
preface, he vindicates the Smiths from the attacks of the satirists, points out
how many distinguished men have borne the name, and laughs good-naturedly
at the S?nythsj SniythcSy and Sviijths^ who seek to distinguish themselves from
their namesakes by an affected orthography. His endeavour, he says, has been
to prepare what he calls a librod^orocA this prolific sept ; and this be has done so
well, that the book may be fairly said to be one which no Smith, Smyth, Smythc, or
Smijth, ought to be without."

From the " Herald and Genealogist."

In other terms he has exercised them in a true antiquari?

" It will thus be seen that Mr. Grazebrook has exercised at once the functions o^
Editor and Author ; and we may justly say that he has exercised them alike with judg-
ment and erudition.
Altogether we feel that this is a book which, in
and historical spirit
limited sphere, will be a standard work, and an example, besides, for others on t
same plan. We could make many interesting extracts if our pages were at liber
instead of being pre-engaged : and we are saved the space that minute critici:
would occupy by finding nothing to find fault with, and (at present) nothing to adu!

j

\

Also yjist Published,

^to, 3 J 6d.

^txnXysx^ of ^mirt) of ^cotlantr

BY

F. M. SMITH, Capt., R.A.

Forming a supplement to Mr. H. S. Grazebrook^s Heraldry

of Smith.

I

air

UK
W

Bible. N.T. Gospels.
Polyglot

The Gothic and Anglo-
Saxon Gospels in
Coluitns with the Versions
of Wycliffe and Tyndale

Parallel

B3
25^9

13?^

PO.TIF: 7AL INSTITUTE
OF~ MfilDlAEVAL STUDIES

59 QUEtN-S PARK

Toronto 5. Canada

